Gender and World War II

GLOBAL CONTEXT

The period from 1931 to 1945 started off with the Great Depression and ended with the deaths
of sixty million people worldwide in the Second World War. The Depression was unprecedented in
its global reach and in the depth of economic dislocation it produced. Economic disasters
helped to fuel extremist policies in a number of industrialized countries. Immediately
following the Depression, World War II produced far greater levels of suffering. Both the
Depression and the war led to major changes in gender relations as governments and civilians
responded aggressively to economic and military crises.

Beginning in 1929, all the industrialized countries in the world (except for the Soviet Union,
which had a state-managed economy and was cut off from trade relations with most of the rest
of the world at that time) were plunged into massive unemployment, with levels reaching 25
percent. For example, the German economy was still reeling from the hyperinflation of the
1920s, and it suffered a 33 percent unemployment rate in the early 1930s. In addition to
massive unemployment and widespread bank failures, the United States and Canada were struck by
the loss of hundreds of thousands of farms in the Great Plains, a result of the years of
drought known as the "Dust Bowl." Workers had no money to pay for commodities; this led to
plummeting prices, which in turn led to a crash in world trade. This had particularly harsh
effects on those countries that needed to sell luxury products on the world market to survive,
such as Japan and China (silk) or Germany and the United States (automobiles). International
trade fell by 66 percent from 1929 to 1934.

Trading nations adopted protectionist policies, but in the end, these hurt everyone except the
USSR, as each country was willing to impoverish the others to protect itself. This
protectionist tendency began to emerge in foreign policy as well, as governments saw less
reason to cooperate with each other through the League of Nations or other multilateral
bodies. In 1932 Japan was the first country to abandon the League when it objected to Japan's
annexation of Manchuria as a puppet state called Manzhouguo. The League was powerless to
oppose the invasion of Ethiopia by Italy's fascist government under Benito Mussolini, or the
assistance provided by Nazi Germany and fascist Italy to the fascist rebellion against the
government of Spain, which ended with the rebels' victory and the imposition of the
dictatorship of Francisco Franco (1892-1975).

Mussolini governed Italy from 1922 on, calling himself "Il Duce" (the leader). He nationalized
75 percent of the Italian economy in the early 1930s. In Germany, Adolf Hitler and his Nazi
Party came to power in 1933 and immediately began dismantling democracy and building up
military-industrial production, in violation of the 1919 Versailles Treaty. Hitler styled
himself as "Führer" (leader), following Mussolini's example. The Soviet Union began its first
Five-Year Plan at the same time, collectivizing agriculture throughout the country and
deporting or killing millions of kulaki (rich farmers). This led to the horrific famine of
1932-1933, in which eleven million people starved to death. To silence his critics, the Soviet
leader Joseph Stalin purged two million people, sending them to labor camps or executing them.

Meanwhile, as its war in China escalated, Japan had moved ideologically closer to Nazi Germany
and fascist Italy, and the three countries signed the Anti-Comintern Pact against Russia in
1936-1937. At that time, the three came to be known in the West as the Axis powers. Japan
battled the USSR in a series of skirmishes at Nomonhan, a small village on the border between
Manzhouguo and Mongolia, beginning in May 1939, but this did not stop the Germans from
secretly humiliating their Japanese ally by signing the Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact in
August 1939. The Nomonhan Incident ended in September with approximately ten thousand
casualties each on the Russian and Japanese sides; at around the same time the Germans invaded
Poland from the west and the Russians invaded it from the east. The German occupation of
Poland was brutal-their extermination camp at Auschwitz opened in 1940-and the Soviets
arrested and executed thousands of Poles as "counterrevolutionaries." The Nazis murdered
between two million and four million people, mostly Jews, at Auschwitz.

Bound to Poland by treaty, France, Britain, and the Commonwealth countries declared war on
Germany in September 1939. (Britain's colony in India did not actively join the fight against
the Axis powers; many Indians joined the Indian National Army, which sided with Japan against
Britain, although many more joined Gandhi's call to resist fascism while also carrying out
massive civil disobedience against Britain in the "Quit India" movement.) By May 1940, Germany
had conquered Norway, Denmark, Belgium, Holland, and France. Germany was bombing Britain in
advance of a planned invasion, Italy attacked British colonies in Africa, and Japan moved its
armies into French Indochina (Vietnam). The world was at war.

Of the major powers, only the United States and the Soviet Union were not yet involved in
World War II by the first months of 1940. (Latin American countries, which were not major
powers at that time, joined the war against the Axis between 1942, when Mexico and Brazil
declared war, and 1945, when Argentina did.) In 1940, Germany, Italy, and Japan signed one
more mutual security pact, the Tripartite Pact, which was directed against the United States.
Then Germany violated its Non-Aggression Pact with Russia by invading that country in June
1941. This occurred just as Japan was negotiating a Non-Aggression Pact of its own with the
USSR. (The Japanese-Soviet Pact held until August 8, 1945, the last week of World War II, but
Germany had again humiliated its ally.) The United States was not yet at war, although it had
begun to supply the Russians and British with armaments. As Japanese forces moved toward the
southern part of the French colony of Vietnam, the British colony of Malaya (which included
Singapore), and the Dutch colony of the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia),the United States placed
severe economic sanctions on Japan, especially an oil embargo. Negotiations to end the embargo
failed, and Japan bombed Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, which pulled the United States into
World War II.

Wartime always alters gender relations, and the prewar and wartime years were no exception.
Ideological changes came earlier in the Soviet Union, as the notion of gender equality was
embedded in Communist thought (Clements 2004). Changes in daily life followed in the 1920s,
with women being pushed into factories as the USSR ramped up industrialization. At the same
time, however, there was ambivalence about the role of women in the home. The "New Soviet
Woman" was told to be both excellent at work and dedicated to the home, which was to be a
place of refuge for her husband (who needed to rest from his labors) as well as a place of
nurturance for the children. The New Soviet Man would be made over from a rough country fellow
to a bold and hardworking man who might rise to become a Party leader.

In Latin America, the modern secular state elevated men and virility (Besse 2004). In Mexico,
for example, the post-1917 revolutionaries associated nationalism with virility, and they even
silenced women revolutionaries because they believed women were inherently conservative. At
the same time, the nationalist populism that the Mexican government espoused focused on social
and economic justice and helped to ease some of the patriarchal dominance within the family in
order to allow women to better serve the nation as wives and mothers. In Argentina, the
Peronist government forged close ties with male labor union leaders and emphasized "manly"
responsibility to protect the weak (women, workers, and others). In North America and Western
Europe, with the exception of France and Switzerland, most women earned the vote in the
interwar period (Sowerwine and Grimshaw 2004). In the 1930s, the fascist governments of Italy,
Spain, and Greece snatched the vote away from women after they had already earned it. German
women did not lose the vote with the rise of Hitler, but that did not make any difference, as
the vote became meaningless when all Germans lost their political voice. Mussolini announced
that a woman's function was to bear children, and to get women back in the household, he cut
women's wages to half those of men. Hitler's Germany closed birth control clinics, dissolved
feminist groups, labor unions, and socialist parties, and disallowed women from running for
public office. Women were to focus on the three K's-Kinder, Kirche, Küche (children, church,
kitchen).

Women in the democracies fared better, although gender continued to divide them from men.
France's conservative climate in the 1930s meant that, even with a socialist prime minister,
women still did not get the vote. On the other hand, France enacted provisions to support
mothers financially and repealed the part of the Napoleonic Code that required women to obey
their. husbands. France, Britain, Australia, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands, and pre-fascist
Italy and Germany all developed policies to support mothers financially after World War I. The
United States lagged behind, creating the Aid to Dependent Children program in 1935.

World War II and the subsequent mobilization of millions of men for military service drew
women into the workplace in unprecedented numbers. In the United States, for example, female
employment rose from 12 million in 1940 to 19 million in 1945; in Canada, the number of women
in the workforce rose from 600,000 in 1940 to 1.2 million in 1943. Australian and New Zealand
women were mobilized in "land armies" to grow food for Britain. In those European countries
invaded by Germany that had enjoyed greater democratic rights before conquest, many women
worked in order to survive, but not to support their conqueror.

JAPAN

Feminism and Politics in the War Years

Following the Manchurian Incident in 1931 (see Chapter 5), Japanese feminists struggled with
the question of supporting their nation-a key element in the quest for women's rights-or
opposing the increasing repression at home and the expanding warfare on the Asian continent.
At first most of them opposed Japan's foreign policy and continued to work for women's rights
at home while recognizing that the struggle for voting rights was increasingly hopeless. By
the end of the 1930s feminists abandoned even these efforts. During the period the Japanese
call the Fifteen-Year War, from 1931 to 1945, almost all progressives and advocates of civil
rights either went to jail, abandoned their activist movements and lived quietly in the
countryside, or tried to find a way to live through the bad times by cooperating with the
government.

In the years immediately after the Manchurian Incident, feminists, speaking as "mothers of
humanity," outspokenly condemned the war (Ichikawa, quoted in Mackie 2002, 101). "Mothers of
humanity" was a maternalist description of women that women's suffrage advocate Ichikawa Fusae
had used in a November 1931 newspaper column blasting the Japanese incursion into Manchuria.
Feminists' opposition was to military expansionism in China, and not to Japanese colonialism
in Korea, which few opposed. By the end of the decade, feminists and others appeared to shift
their views on a variety of topics in addition to the war. For example, Ichikawa framed the
quest for civil rights as a way for women to "assist the Emperor" (Ichikawa 1935). Today,
historians note that the emperor system (tennōsei) was one of the roots of Japanese prewar
illiberalism and militarism (Ienaga 1978), although in the 1930s few Japanese would have
considered the idea of serving the emperor to be any different from the idea of serving the
country. Because prewar feminists tried to become part of a now discredited government system,
later feminist historians have critiqued them. When Japan's presence in China and Manchuria
became militarized, those Japanese feminists who had been involved in transnational movements
felt torn between nationalism and transnationalism. They were disheartened by the differences
between what they called the Japanese civilian government's "pacific assurances" about the
conflict in Manchuria following the Manchurian Incident of 1931, on one hand, and the
aggressive actions of the Japanese military, on the other. Japanese WCTU representatives who
traveled to the continent in the early 1930s were naively stunned by their Chinese
counterparts' anger at Japan's military actions (Ogawa 2007, 165). The U.S. branch of the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, previously allies of Japan's WCTU and
Women's Peace Association, lobbied the U.S. government to impose sanctions against Japan after
the Manchurian Incident. In 1934, Japan's WCTU and YWCA leaders lamented this turn of events
in Japanese Women Speak: A Message from the Christian Women of Japan to the Christian Women of
America, an English-language book published in Boston and targeted to a trans-Pacific American
audience: The writer wishes to emphasize the difficult position in which Jappanese Christians,
and especially Japanese women, who are promoters of international peace and harmony, have been
placed. To some [Japanese] nationalists, the term "internationalism" is synonymous with
"Communism," and they regard Christians as dangerous and disloyal; while the peace-workers and
pacifists of other countries brand them as cowards, kowtowing humbly before militarism. (Kawai
and Kubushiro 1934, 168)

What these Christian peace advocates in the WCTU and YWCA did not recognize was that their
statements of support for transnational friendship through Christianity did not go far enough.
In a letter from the Japanese Women's Peace Association to the Chinese Women's Suffrage League
in 1932, the Peace Association asked for forgiveness for the Japanese government's actions,
thereby placing the onus of unresolved differences on the Chinese victims (Kawai and Kubushiro
1934, 180-181). This failed to address the root causes of transnational tensions-the
imperialistic actions of the Japanese government-and, in fact, assumed a kind of "imperialist
privilege," which is ironic since Japanese Christian women resented being treated with "white
privilege"by Western women, who similarly did not recognize that form of privilege. Gauntlett
Tsune, a member of the Japanese WCTU and YWCA, president of Japan's Women's Peace Association,
and the international president of the Pan-Pacific Women's Association, also did not
anticipate the resistance she would encounter when the Chinese delegates to the 1937 meeting
of the Pan-Pacific Women's Association in Vancouver, British Columbia, initially refused to
attend because Gauntlett was presiding over that meeting.

Japanese Christian women tried to maintain transnational ties across the Pacific in the late
1930s but were increasingly unable to do so. In 1938, to counter negative images of Japan, the
WCTU began publishing an English-language journal, Japan Through Women, to highlight the
positive deeds of Japan's women. But this effort failed, and the Japanese WCTU severed its
ties to the World WCTU at the outset of the Pacific War in December 1941 (Ogawa 2007, 175).
The Japanese WCTU and other Christian groups then refocused their transnationalism toward
Asia, rather than toward the Anglo-American countries. To reach out to China, the Japanese
WCTU built schools and a medical settlement house called Airinkan (Hall of Neighborly Love) in
Beijing and undertook social reform projects, believing these acts of sisterhood would improve
Japan's image in China. But these projects were possible only because they were under the
umbrella created by Japanese military and colonial protection, and rather than improving
Japan's image, they tied the knot of imperialism more tightly (Ogawa 2007, 172).

Like their Christian sisters, with whom they often collaborated in social reform and suffrage
organizations, secular feminists also had long-existing links with feminists across the
Pacific that were strained by Japan's militarist actions. The secular feminists at first
opposed the war, then attempted to persuade their Asian, American, European, and Australian
friends that they represented good transnationalism; finally they made accommodations with
Japan's wartime government, pivoting away from the West and toward Asia. Ichikawa Fusae was
the secular feminist most often criticized after the war for having replaced her earlier
opposition to the state with the kind of wartime collaboration in government-sponsored
activities on the home front undertaken by most other secular and Christian feminists. These
feminists were almost all immediately reestablished as leaders in government or civil society
after the war, but Ichikawa, who later became one of the most highly respected members of the
Diet, was purged by the postwar U.S. military occupation (one of only eight women, out of a
total of two hundred thousand Japanese, who were purged). She did not deny, as did many of her
compatriots, that she had supported the war. Despite or, perhaps, because of this, the
occupation recast her in the immediate postwar years as the archetypal feminist nationalist
who "sold out" to gain a political voice during the war. The transnational feminist links of
both Christian and secular feminists were severely challenged by Japan's military aggression.
The Women's Suffrage League tried to maintain ties to Western friends by publishing Japanese
Women, an English-language newsletter whose goal was similar to that of the WCTU's Japan
Through Women, that is, to maintain transnational unity among women. The journal, edited by
Ichikawa, printed sixteen issues from 1938 through July 1940. In an introductory essay in the
first issue, Ichikawa noted that the goal of the publication was to maintain ties with
feminists overseas in time of war: "It is our earnest desire to have our co-workers abroad
recognize and be acquainted with the work, insignificant perhaps but nevertheless assiduous
effort, of the Japanese women" (Ichikawa 1938). The November 1938 issue contained an article
by the YWCA that recognized that both Japanese Women and Japan Through Women were explicitly
intended to “increase the understanding of foreign women in the problems and interests of
Japanese women" (YWCA National Committee 1938). It noted: "In China, although on one hand
great destruction is being wrought, on the other hand much sympathy is felt toward the
citizens of China, and Japanese women are very eager to participate in medical relief and
assistance for civilians and poor people." The writer used the passive voice in the first part
of this sentence, not mentioning that the Japanese military was responsible for that
destruction. The remaining issues of Japanese Women, especially the May 1940 issue, offer much
insight into the attempts by the Women's Suffrage League and other transnational feminists to
maintain their ties across the Pacific, which were increasingly slipping out of their hands.
At the samè time, Ichikawa and others wrote enthusiastically about their improving
relationships with Chinese women in territory recently pacified and placed under Japanese
control. As noted earlier, these ties were possible because of the reach of the Japanese
government and military. Japan's feminists appeared unaware of the privileges their
nationality conferred. Ichikawa and two other feminists traveled to Japanese-occupied central
China between February 22 and April 11, 1940, and Ichikawa reported on that trip in the May
issue of Japanese Women. She opened by commenting how deeply she was touched by the
devastation of the cities and countryside in that region, and noted that the suffering of war
always seemed to hit women and children most heavily. She compared the suffering of the
Chinese to that of people in Poland and Norway, countries 'devastated by the Germans; it is
hard to tell if she noticed the irony of the comparison. She wrote that it was a "matter of
deep regret that Japan and China found it impossible to solve our mutual problems by peaceful
means" (Ichikawa 1940a). Ichikawa went on to write that the new pro-Japan government in
Nanjing under Wang Jingwei seemed to be improving conditions for Chinese in that city, and she
enthusiastically described meetings with Chinese women leaders who supported Wang's pro-
Japanese puppet government. Meetings with other feminists understandably did not go so well,
she reported. In addition, she wrote, war between Japan and China might have been avoided if
women of the two countries had worked together more closely before the war.

It is clear that she was conflicted between her (vaguely suggested) opposition to Japanese
warfare in China, on one hand, and her pride in the improved ties with some Chinese women made
possible by that aggression, on the other.

In this article, Ichikawa described her leap from trans-Pacific transnationalism to East Asian
transnationalism: We have every reason to regret that educated women of Japan and China have
so far only concentrated themselves upon absorbing Occidental civilization and neglected
entirely to know each other, paying little attention to our racial affiliation which is
extremely close if not identical.. I myself have been to America twice, but to China but once,
and that very recently.

But her desire to maintain transnational ties to America was not yet completely eradicated. In
fact, she merged Sino-Japanese transnationalism with U.S.-Japan transnationalism. Her belief
in the importance and benefit of East Asian transnationalism under the Japanese flag caused
her to reach out emotionally for American support: I am really sorry for this war-torn world
of ours; there is hardly a spot on earth where some kind of trouble is not threatening. It is
indeed a most difficult question how we shall be able to bring about lasting peace out of this
chaotic world..I earnestly seek the moral support of the American women deeply concerned with
the peace of the world, to help us as best as you can to make our Sino-Japanese women's
cooperation a real success.

In the end, the nationalism of the war years would absorb and unravel the prewar era's
transnationalism.

By the middle of the 1930s, women's suffrage was also being challenged, and Japan's militarist
government kept suffragists under close surveillance (Molony 2004, 143). In several elections
in the early 1930s, the WSL campaigned for candidates they believed to be incorruptible,
calling this action an "election purification" movement. They considered this a way to be
involved in politics in a uniquely feminine way (they argued that women, who did not have the
vote, were inherently purer than men). But increasingly the WSL turned to less overtly
political activities as a way of involving disenfranchised women in governance. The first such
issue the WSL turned its attention to was garbage collection and disposal. Since 1932, the
residents of Tokyo's Fukagawa ward, where much of Tokyo's trash was dumped and incinerated,
had resisted the municipal government's push to increase the number of incinerators (Tamanoi
2009, 835). Rather than moving the incinerators to other areas of Tokyo, the government worked
with the WSL to persuade women throughout Tokyo to reduce the overall amount of trash they
generated and to separate it into waste that could be incinerated and waste that could not.
This was ultimately a political and civic activity, but it masqueraded as a housewives
concern, making it acceptable to Japan's conservative leaders. As two WSL leaders noted in
1934: "It is trash that moves Japan and us women. Although we women have no vote to cast, we
can exercise our political rights in local affairs" (Kaneko Shigeri, quoted in Tamanoi 2009).
Ichikawa noted that "because [the garbage problem] is related to women's sphere, we were able
to receive the support of the authorities and general public without any resistance" (Ichikawa
1934). The WSL also joined with consumer groups to bring greater competition to the wholesale
fish market, which was monopolized by a small group of merchants. The WSL embarked on what
they called "the politics of the kitchen" and formed a lobbying group to break up the
monopoly.

In February 1934 the women's activities achieved success when the Tokyo Municipal Council
voted to break up the wholesale monopoly (Ichikawa 1974, 323-325). The last of the feminists'
maternalist movements in the 1930s focused on getting the government to pass welfare
legislation for poor mothers and children. In 1934 twenty women's organizations lobbied
together for the Mother-Child Protection Law. This passed in 1937, giving financial assistance
to mothers who were destitute as a result of the loss of their children's fathers in war. The
WSL considered this law's passage a victory for women (Tomie 2005, 246). These welfare reforms
and women's "politics of the kitchen" activities laid the groundwork for women's greater
social and political involvement after the war (see Chapter 9).

The ideological trends in feminism can be seen in the changing resolutions that came out of
the annual National Women's Suffrage Conventions that were held throughout the 1930s. The
first convention took place in 1930, when feminists were optimistic about getting the vote
(see Chapter 5). At the third convention, in May 1932, the participants roundly condemned the
recent Manchurian Incident and the rise of "fascism" in Japan (Ichikawa 1932). At the fourth
convention, in February 1933, the conveners had hoped to pass a resolution calling for the
reduction of military spending, but they were unable to do so since the Social Democratic
Women's League, a proletarian suffragist group, had come to view continental expansion as a
way of helping the desperately poor in Japan, who were suffering during the Depression. The
fifth convention, held in 1934, supported resolutions for peace, for benefits to families of
soldiers killed in the war, for cooperation with women around the world, for birth control,
and for mother-child protection legislation. By the sixth convention, held in 1935, the
suffragists' views had shifted to calling on the government to give women the vote so they
might help the government in this time of "emergency" or "crisis" (terms used by the
government as euphemisms for war). The conventions were supplanted in 1938 by the Women's
National Emergency Congress (also called the Women's Conference on Current Problems) when the
rise of militarism at home made suffrage conferences suspect (Nishikawa 1997, 53). That marked
the end of conventions focused on women's civil rights until after World War I.

By far the largest women's organizations during the long prewar and war period were those run
by the government. In 1931 the Ministry of Education created the Greater Japan Federated
Women's Association (Dai Nippon Rengo Fujinkai). In 1932 the army took over an originally
independent patriotic women's group called the National Defense Women's Association (Kokubō
Fujinkai), and the Home Ministry took over an older nationalist group called the Patriotic
Women's Association (Aikoku Fujinkai). The independent women's organizations discussed
earlier, both Christian and secular, initially resented these government-affiliated
organizations: they were run by men, they took potential members away from the groups
dedicated to women's rights, and they dealt with women from the perspective of mobilizing them
to serve the state through stereotyped women's roles. When the autonomous groups were forced
to disband around 1940, most members of those groups came to accept the government
organizations as venues for women's agency outside the home, as well as suitable means for
serving the nation. The membership of these organizations, taken together, reached nineteen
million by the end of the decade. These women saw soldiers off to war, packed kits for them,
and were expected to act as "good wives and wise mothers" to serve the state.

Full-scale warfare between China and Japan broke out in July 1937, and the government
increased efforts to mobilize society spiritually, materially, and militarily. In response,
the WSL and seven other nongovernmental women's groups, such as the YWCA and the WCTU, joined
together in a Federation of Japanese Women's Organizations (Nihon Fujin Dantai Renmei). It was
this federation that, together with a dozen other Japanese women's organizations, held the
Women's National Emergency Congress that replaced the National Women's Suffrage Convention in
1938. The congress promoted the idea that working with the state was a way for women to
empower one another and to serve other women and children on the home front.

In December 1939 the Federation of Japanese Women's Organizations joined with the government-
affiliated patriotic women's associations in a huge meeting in Tokyo, during which they called
on the government to allow women to serve the state by aiding the economy (Women's Conference
1940). The WSL believed-naively, as it turned out-that this collaboration would persuade the
nineteen million members of the government-led organizations to adopt a pro-suffrage position,
and that the government could be persuaded to "hand over to women themselves" the leadership
of the huge national organizations (Ichikawa 1940b, 4). In addition, Ichikawa wrote, by doing
essential work on behalf of the nation, Japanese women would gain rights, just as Western
women had after World War I: "We sincerely hope that the day may soon come when we too may be
more fully equipped to work not only for the welfare of the nation but for the world and the
humanity at large to which one half of the human race belongs" (Ichikawa 1938, 1-2).

In February 1942, the government amalgamated all Japanese women's organizations into one large
group, the Greater Japan Women's Association (Dai Nippon Fujinkai), which included the
government-directed groups as well as the more progressive feminist, Christian, and social
reform groups that had not yet been disbanded. Disappointing many feminists, the leadership of
this association continued to be male. Trade unions were terminated and laborers were brought
under the Patriotic Industry Association, so union and socialist women's groups ceased to
exist as well. Many leaders of formerly autonomous women's groups were placed on national
boards. Ichikawa herself was placed on the board of the Patriotic Press Association, which
monitored the press; it was her membership on this press board that caused her to be purged by
the postwar U.S. occupation (Molony 2005, 60). There were no autonomous women's organizations
left in Japan after 1942, and if women wished to have a voice or improve conditions on the
home front during the war, they were forced to join the government. As it turned out, women
were outnumbered by men and ignored on virtually all the boards on which they served (Ichikawa
1942). Many women's rights activists accepted the wartime government's invitation to join
national organizations because they hoped to show that women deserved a role in the state
(Garon 1993, 7-8). In the first decades after World War II,historians and many others
considered women's wartime cooperation with the state to have been unavoidable in the context
of the times. In addition, they applauded feminists' involvement in national organizations as
the first steps toward equality. However, after the widespread exposure of the "comfort women"
issue (to be discussed in detail later in this chapter), this attitude gave way to a major
reassessment in the 1980s of prewar feminists and their quest for inclusion in a state that
had carried out heinous anti-woman atrocities.

Gender, Diaspora, and Empire

Japanese men and women were geographically mobile in the decades after the 1880s, when the
Japanese government lifted the restrictions on emigration (see Chapter 4). Although the
largest number of migrants intended their stay to be temporary, the overseas stays often
became permanent, whether across the Pacific or, more commonly, in Northeast Asia. Potential
migrants viewed Taiwan (a colony of Japan since 1895), Korea (a colony since 1910), and
Manchuria (a puppet state since 1932) as parts of Japan. But in those territories, gender
played a role that was different from that in the Japanese homeland and different from that in
Western colonies as well.

Most significant was that Japanese women outnumbered Japanese men in Korea in the first years
of colonial possession. This was opposite to the pattern of European and American imperialism,
where men vastly outnumbered women in the initial years of those countries' colonies. The
largest number of colonial Japanese women were in the sex trades. Japanese-owned newspapers in
Korea praised Japanese sex workers for bringing civilization to some of their rough customers,
especially Russians in Northeast Asia. Other Japanese women sought work in Korea and Manchuria
as professionals, since opportunities to work as journalists, shopkeepers, colonial
administrators, and even schoolteachers were more limited in the home country. Middle-class
Japanese women also sought occupations in colonial Taiwan (Sokolsky 2014). This pattern was
similar to that of European women, who also looked for opportunities in the colonies, often in
the professions or in religious proselytizing, that were less available to them at home. In
terms of sexuality, Japanese men and women in the colonies behaved differently than each other
and differently than European men and women in their colonies. Japanese women were more likely
to marry Korean men, but Japanese men greatly preferred wives or mistresses who were Japanese;
European colonial men often had affairs with local women, while European women were largely
either unmarried or married to European men (Brooks 2005). Korean men who migrated to Japan to
work in the interwar period far outnumbered Korean women in Japan. Virtually all the Korean
women in Japan were married to Korean men, while a number of Korean men married Japanese women
(Smith 2005). By the 1930s, as Japan was intensifying the development of its possessions in
both Northeast Asia and Taiwan, the percentage of diasporic Japanese men jumped rapidly ahead
of the percentage of women. Entrepreneurs set up massive production facilities, mining
operations, and hydroelectric plants, which for the most part employed both Japanese and local
men rather than women. There were more than half a million Japanese of both genders in Korea
by 1930 and more than two hundred thousand in Manchuria. Hundreds of thousands more were
Japanese military men in Korea and Manchuria. Many Japanese also migrated to the islands the
League of Nations had given Japan as protectorates after World War I; in 1935, for example,
fifty thousand Japanese lived on tiny Saipan. In addition, large numbers of Japanese migrated
to cities throughout non-Japanese-controlled East Asia, including twenty-six thousand in
Shanghai, where they played a large role in banking and textiles. Each of those cities had its
own Japanese women's groups, newspapers, and medical clinics. These kinds of ethnic
communities developed in North and South America as well, where the Japanese, like all other
immigrant groups, published their own newspapers and had their own community organizations,
Buddhist temples, and Christian churches.

The war years were a terrible time for most Japanese migrants. And yet evenen during the 1940s
some Japanese women and men continued to live adventurous lives in East Asia. For example,
Hayashi Fumiko and Yoshiya Nobuko, two highly popular writers (see Chapter 6), were part of
the first "Pen Squadron," male and female writers sent by the Ministry of Information to the
front lines in China to report on the war and to give encouragement to Japanese soldiers.
Hayashi wrote on assignment for major Japanese newspapers; she was the first Japanese woman to
enter Nanjing after it fell to Japanese forces, and the first Japanese civilian to enter
Hankou. In 1940 and 1941, she lectured throughout the Japanese empire, from Japan to Korea,
Manchuria, and occupied China (Horiguchi 2009, 67). As the existence of the Pen Squadron
indicates, the extent of the Japanese empire was measured not only by its male soldiers'
wartime conquests but also by the reach of some civilian women.

Calling Manzhouguo a "new paradise," the Japanese military tried to entice five million young
farmers to settle there to release the pressure of overpopulation at home and to establish a
strong ethnically Japanese population base. Village leaders in Japan were recruited to sell
this community emigration program, but few people initially took the bait. In 1938 the

BOX 8.1

8/ GENDER AND WORLD WAR II

Japanese Americans in Internment Camps

in the United States In North America, 110,000 native-born American citizens of Japanese
ancestry and Japanese immigrants-who were not eligible for citizenship because of racist anti-
Asian laws-who resided in the western region of the United States were placed in concentration
camps (also called internment camps) under Executive Order 9066 of February 19, 1942. Many
remained there until 1946, losing their homes, livelihoods, and property. Young men could get
out of the camps by joining segregated units in the U.S. military, but the opportunity to
serve in the military did not exist for young women. Both young women and men, if they were
fortunate, could get out by attending universities, most of them east of the Mississippi, and
most of them religious schools that did not harbor the anti-Japanese attitudes more common in
the western region. Japanese American students began to attend these colleges and universities
in 1942 and 1943, and women made up about 40 percent of one group of a thousand students able
to leave the camps in this way. Others were approved to leave to take up jobs that needed to
be filled during the war. Three hundred women found positions in nursing. Others undertook
office work, factory and agricultural work, and domestic service. By 1945, 37 percent of men
over the age of sixteen and 63 percent of women over sixteen had left the camps. Most who were
able to do so were young; older family members had few such chances to be released. This
changed family dynamics radically, as women who left the camps were forced to develop greater
self-reliance, living among non-Japanese Americans who might not readily accept them; in
addition, their income contributed to their families (Matsumoto 1984, 11-13). Similar camps
were set up by the Canadian government, which incarcerated twenty-two thousand people. And the
United States rounded up 2,264 Japanese immigrants in Peru and shipped them to American
concentration camps. colonial authorities began recruiting boys from thirteen to sixteen years
of age to be part of Youth Brigades stationed in Manzhouguo. The boys soon became depressed
and homesick, so a year later the colonial authorities began recruiting girls they called
"continental brides" to join the boys. The Youth Brigades members and their young brides
eventually made up oneJapan 329 third of the total of 380,000 Japanese farmers in Manzhouguo.
The Japanese military later conscripted the adult male migrants and Youth Brigade boys,
leaving the women and children behind to continue farming. In August 1945 the Soviets invaded
Manzhouguo. Members of the Japanese military used all available transportation for their own
escape, abandoning the women and children to rape, slaughter, and starvation at the hands of
the Russians. More than half a million Japanese subjects, including hundreds of thousands of
Koreans, were hauled off to Siberia, and at least three hundred thousand were never heard from
again. Some thirty thousand Japanese children survived because their Japanese mothers were
able to leave them with kindly Chinese neighbors. Raised as Chinese, many of these children
tried to find their Japanese families after diplomatic relations between China and Japan
resumed in the 1970s (Lipman, Molony, and Robinson 2012, 314-315).

Other overseas Japanese suffered greatly at the end of the war. While soldiers and sailors
were the archetypes of Japanese masculinity, women were eventually used as symbols of
unflappable resistance to the powerful AngloAmerican military. As historian Haruko Cook notes,
this symbolism was created by journalists, and it helped to prolong the war (H. Cook, 2005).
An American journalist's incorrect report that thousands of women were jumping to their deaths
rather than surrender to American forces on Saipan was picked up by the Japanese press and
published in Japan as well. (As Cook notes, most civilians actually did surrender.) For
American readers, this report was an indication that the Japanese were fanatical and would
never surrender. The report had a similar effect on Japanese readers, encouraging the men to
keep struggling even as civilian women bravely went to their deaths. But the gendered
dichotomy that had long "positioned men exclusively as warriors on the battlefield and women
as mere supporters and providers of comfort on the home front" (Frühstück 2014, 163) was
itself modified by the end of the war. Nurses worked on the battlefield and high school girls
were trained in firing guns, and in June 1945 the Volunteer Military Service Laws were passed:
women between seventeen and forty were to be conscripted into the National Volunteer Combat
Corps, and the Greater Japan Women's Association was dissolved and its members reorganized
into the Combat Corps (Frühstück 2014, 172). Two months later, the war was over.

Women were not, however, inducted into the army as soldiers before the end of the war. The
combatant experience belonged entirely to men. For many young men of the war era, "the soldier
embodied Japan and what it meant to be a Japanese man" (T. Cook 2005, 259). As we saw in
Chapter 4, this was a constructed type of masculinity, as there had been no army tradition for
commoners in Japan until the end of the nineteenth century. In many ways, Japanese soldiers
resembled those of other industrialized, countries; even the brutal atrocities that are still
used to define the Japanese military man have parallels in every war and in every country. The
most notorious, the Nanjing Massacre, lasted for six weeks after Japanese troops entered the
Chinese city of Nanjing on December 13, 1937. During this time, around two hundred thousand
people were killed, of whom only about twenty thousand were men of military age (the actual
numbers will never be known, but most historians believe these are reasonable estimates). Tens
of thousands of women were raped, and an additional sixty thousand refugees outside the city
limits were killed or starved to death. The scale of this atrocity is enormous, but the events
themselves and the reasons for them are not unique. The historical explanations for these
events, as for similar atrocities around the world, include the soldiers' reactions to the
loss of their comrades, harsh hierarchical treatment within the Japanese military, a mob
mentality, and the dehumanizing of the enemy.

One additional explanation for the soldiers' actions, which was particularly important to
Japanese military leaders at that time, was related to their view of masculine sexuality: the
atrocities were blamed on a medical notion of uncontrollable male sexuality. This view-that
war atrocities are caused by men who cannot control their sexuality-was not common in military
thinking elsewhere, nor in Japan today. To control the incidence of rape in areas under
Japanese military occupation, they reasoned, the army should set up a system of "comfort
stations." Battlefield sex stations had been deployed earlier, but the systematic building of
stations to follow the advancing army occurred after the Nanjing Massacre. The workers in
these stations were young women who were either enticed with promises of factory work and then
turned into sex slaves or simply kidnapped. At the time, the term used for these women was
ianfu (comfort women), but in reality they were military sexual slaves. Korean, Chinese,
Japanese, Vietnamese, Dutch, Filipina, and other women made up this army of sex slaves.
Historians dispute the total numbers, but most estimate that there were between 150,00o and
200,000, of whom 80 to 90 percent were Korean women and girls. The experiences of women in
this gendered atrocity are discussed later in this chapter.

The Home Front in Japan and the End of the War

In 1940 the prime minister, Konoe Fumimaro, placed all civic organizations, such as labor
unions, political parties, and women's groups, under the rule of mass state organizations. One
of these was the Imperial Rule Assistance Association (IRAA), which was intended to coordinate
many aspects of daily life. In the end, however, it really had just one important role: the
distribution of rationed rice and other commodities. Every population center was organized
into neighborhood associations under the IRAA, and because most men were away at war, women
came to play a leadership role in these associations, arranging for distribution of rice to
all members of the community. These leadership functions helped train women for political
roles after the war, when women gained full civil rights. The National General Mobilization
Law, passed in 1938, was intended to control business, labor, and many other parts of the
wartime economy. In 1941 a labor draft was set up under this law, requiring all men ages
sixteen to forty who were not in the military and all unmarried women ages sixteen to twenty-
five to register for the labor draft. Men and women were treated differently because the
ideology of "good wife, wise mother" made it difficult to draft women with responsibilities to
their husbands and children (Miyake 1991). By the end of the war, one million adult men and
one million adult women had been drafted into war production, and three million children had
been pulled from school to work in munitions factories. Additionally, two million Koreans and
Chinese were taken from their homelands to work in Japan's mines and munitions plants.
"Extravagance," the Japanese state told its subjects from 1938 till 1945, "is the enemy!”
(Havens 1978, 10). But what was extravagance? By the end of the war, the average person in
Japan was allowed only a starvation-level ration of under 1,00o calories per day (Earhart
2008, 127). Extravagance meant something else-that is, consuming frivolously during difficult
times. Here clothing played a role. Because gender was an important part of defining the
nation, the control of extravagant clothing was also gendered. But in Japan, unlike other
nations at war, just making simpler clothes and using cheaper fabrics would not do. In
previous decades, Western-style clothing had been increasingly seen as more "functional"-that
is, more practical, cooler in summer, and cheaper. Working women (for example, nurses,
teachers, and bus conductors) had worn Western clothing before the war (Ajima 2011, Gordon
2011). But if Japan was fighting a war against Western powers, how could clothing be designed
both to save resources and to maintain nationalistic spirits? The army began to discuss
appropriate civilian national clothing as early as 1930. Men's military uniforms, adopted from
Western styles more than sixty years earlier, were the original "functional" clothing. Several
branches of the government organized committees to design and promote national dress, first
for men and later for women. Wearing national dress was encouraged During World War II, the
Japanese government urged women to wear "standard dress"-the simplified dresses on the right-
or moonpe trousers. This encouraged frugality and allowed women to work more efficiently.

but never required under Japanese law. In 1937 the government announced a plan to develop a
kokuminfuku-a national uniform or literally "citizen's dress"-for men. When the government
eventually got around to convening an advisory board to design clothing for women, in March
1941, there was to be no national uniform for ladies. Instead, the women's designs called for
hyŏjun fuku, or "standard dress." Only men were considered kokumin—citizens. Some of the
guidelines for the standard dress were the same as for the men's uniform-it had to be
economical and easy to move in. But getting women to wear the clothing was difficult. The
Greater Japan Women's Association took it as their task to persuade women to wear these simple
clothes. The cover of Nippon Fujin, the association's magazine, showed a gentle housewife in a
standard dress. But monpe, the baggy pants worn by women farmers, became the real uniform of
Japanese women during the war. Monpe were one of the styles approved as standard dress by the
government, although it was clear that the government really preferred functional dresses or
very simplified kimonos for women. Women made monpe out of worn-out dresses and kimonos. No
one required women to wear monpe, but poverty and shortages drove women into monpe, perhaps
even more than practicality and a patriotic desire to avoid extravagance. The war ended with
Japan's surrender on August 15, 1945. Almost 3 million Japanese had died, of whom 1.7 million
were military men. The rest were civilians who died from starvation (the raw materials used
for fertilizer production had been turned over to munitions production, so there was very
little food in Japan at the end of the war) or in air raids, most of them firebombings. Two
atomic bombs were dropped, on August 6 (Hiroshima)

and August 9 (Nagasaki). Nine million people were left homeless. The old Japan came to an end,
and as we shall see in Chapter 9, gender relations were one of the areas that changed
radically after the war.

KOREA

The outbreak of the second Sino-Japanese War in 1937 and the subsequent Pacific War
(1941–1945) had deep ramifications for Korean society, as Korea became the crossroads for
Japan's military ambitions throughout Asia and the Pacific. With the passage of the 1938
National General Mobilization Law, the colonial government began to regulate and deploy both
material and human resources to support Japan's "sacred war" (sŏngjŏn). Heavy industries were
actively developed to cater to the war effort. Under the slogan "Japan and Korea as a single
body" (naisen ittai), the colonial government made full use of educational and community
programs to try to turn the Korean populace into completely obedient and loyal subjects who
would be willing to sacrifice themselves for the Japanese emperor and Japan's war efforts on
the home front as well as on the battlefield. The stated aim of the Greater East Asia Co-
Prosperity Sphere propaganda campaign was to free Asian nations from the threat of Western
imperialism, but its true motivation was to secure Japan's position as the dominant power in
Asia and the Pacific in shaping the new international order. The total mobilization campaign
and the increasingly forceful assimilation policies in late colonial Korea had a significant
impact on the lives of women on all fronts-economic, political, cultural, and practical. While
the conventional ideal of woman as "wise mother, good wife" continued to be promoted, women
were made to feel that they could make a vital contribution to the war effort by saving daily
resources, sending their sons to the battlefront, working in military factories and farming
lands, serving as nurses on the battlefield, or actively collaborating with the Japanese power
in the distribution of wartime propaganda. It was also during this turbulent period that the
infamous human trafficking system, euphemistically referred to as the "comfort women" program,
was initiated, forcing a vast number of women into service as sex slaves in Japanese
encampments throughout Asia and the Pacific.

Mobilization of Women in Heavy Industries

After the Manchurian Incident in 1931, Japan set in place various policies that made the
Korean peninsula a strategic location for Japan's ambitions to become the central power in
Northeast Asia. As Japan's involvement in military excursions escalated in the late 1930s,
there was an increased demand for industrial production of goods for use by the military. Thus
a number of legal provisions were enacted to effectively recruit and draft colonized subjects
into heavy industries that served the needs of the military. For instance, the 1939 ordinance
on the National Labor Draft gave the emperor full power to conscript any of his subjects in
Japan or any of its colonies into labor that was vital to the war effort. The 1941 National
Registration System. required Korean men and women between the ages of twelve and forty "to
register with the government for potential enlistment into war-related services." Furthermore,
the Patriotic Labor Association Law of 1941 and the establishment of the Wartime Student
Organization in 1943 essentially turned secondary and vocational schools into institutes for
training laborers (J. Kim 2007, 87-89). It was within this rapid mobilization of laborers that
young girls and women were actively recruited to work in heavy industries that were needed by
the military. The Women's Labor Volunteer Corps (küllo chŏngsindae)

was one prominent organization that worked to recruit school-age girls and recent female
graduates from elementary and middle schools, as well as unmarried women over fourteen years
of age, to work in heavy industries. The promise of higher wages also attracted women who were
already in the workforce as factory workers and domestic servants. Schoolteachers, community
leaders, local representatives, government officials, and the print media were all
instrumental in mobilizing girls and young women to sign up for these new work opportunities.
Prior to the war, women laborers were largely concentrated in light industries, and that was
also true after the war; however, during wartime an unprecedented range of jobs, particularly
in heavy industries, were opened to women. According to an August 26, 1944, article in Maeil
sinbo, the official newspaper of the colonial government, women worked in "mining,
electricity, communications, machinery, aircraft production, shipbuilding, chemicals,
ceramics, carpentry, and building and construction" (J. Kim 2007, 91).

Those women laborers were stationed at factories throughout East Asia.

They underwent as much as six months of job training before commencing their work. The lives
they led in the dormitories and factories were heavily routinized. For example, at the
Fujikoshi steel factory in Toyama, Japan, both Japanese and Korean workers had a rigid daily
schedule, rising by 5:00 a.m. to greet their dormitory parents and to recite the empire
narrative (hwangminhwa sōsa in Korean; kōminka jiji in Japanese) before breakfast. They would
then report to the factory, where they would work until noon, break for lunch, then go back to
work until there was a short afternoon break at 3:00 p.m. They would then return to work until
5:00 p.m., when they would head back to the dormitory to eat dinner and be in bed by 9:00 p.m.
(J. Kim 2007, 95). These routines, as well as the radio programs and visual propaganda, such
as posters, helped to fashion the identity, mentality and lifestyle of the workers. Very
little is known about the actual lives of those women deployed to work in heavy industries in
late colonial Korea. However, the Korean labor historian Janice Kim argues that the bits of
oral histories available indicate that female workers "became more independent and powerful
through the unparalleled experience of wage work." Kim sums up, "Although oppressed and
victimized in political memory, many working women of late colonial Korea, in transcending the
boundaries of class and gender, saw themselves as pioneers" (J. Kim 2007, 99).

Wartime Domesticity

The escalating demands of the war effort, especially after the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese
War in 1937, caused Japan to seek fuller control over human and material resources in its
colonies. Various legal provisions, such as the National Spiritual Mobilization program,
enacted in 1937, and the National General Mobilization Law, passed in 1938, signaled a
dramatic shift in colonial policies. Such mobilization efforts aimed not only to advance
economic and military development in support of Japan's war but also to maximize cólonial
subjects' loyalty to the empire. Under the slogan of naisen ittai, the colonial authority
implemented policies to compel loyalty to the Japanese emperor through measures that either
eliminated old links to Korean identity and culture or established new links to Japan
(although Koreans were not invariably passive and managed to complicate the colonial policies
in a number of different ways. See Henry 2014; Kim 2013). One strategy was to introduce major
educational reforms that emphasized Japanese-language proficiency while eliminating
instruction in Korean language, history, and culture-crucial elements in constructing Korean
national identity. Other policies mandated attendance at Shinto shrines and required Koreans
to adopt Japanese names (changsi kyemyŏng). These efforts toward total mobilization were made
in virtually every domain of society-families, schools, municipal communities, neighborhood
associations, and print media. By 1940, there were some 350,000 Neighborhood Patriotic
Associations. Each association comprised ten households, and it served as the basic unit for
collecting contributions, drafting soldiers, imposing surveillance on the local community, and
mobilizing the populace for everyday rituals (such as "silent prayer time," devoted to prayers
for the safety of soldiers fighting on the front lines and the souls of those who had fallen
on the battlefield). These associations served to mobilize Koreans in the interest of the
Japanese war effort through every conceivable mechanism--formal legal measures, aesthetic
images, everyday rituals, and false promises.

During wartime the role of women underwent a major change. The traditional women's role as
homemaker and "wise mother, good wife" continued, but in times of military conflict the
services of women were needed beyond the private, domestic arena. They were expected to play
an important role for the state. The active intervention of the state in the domestic sphere
unfolded through a wide range of campaign and reform efforts. In those campaigns, traditional
Korean family life was criticized as wasteful, unscientific, and ineffective. Thus the typical
Korean home was subject to major reform, and the typical housewife was envisioned as the
central figure in enacting those reforms. At a very mundane level, women were asked to reform
their standard daily practices in a way that contributed to management of the emergency
situation. For example, instead of the traditional white clothing, they wore simple colored
clothing that would require less time and expense to maintain.

They were told that the daily diet should be minimalist-a bowl of soup and kimch'i for
breakfast, and cold rice for lunch. They had to save energy, recycle waste, eliminate
unnecessary rituals and gatherings, and work harder.

Women were also seen as the moral compass for their children, instilling in them a sense of
patriotism for the Japanese empire and fealty to the emperor. Mothers were expected to take
pride in sending their sons to war to defend the empire. The visual representations of women
in late colonial Korea often portrayed them waving Japanese flags for the war effort,
reinforcing "their important duties as individuals who could meet both the demands of the
family and the state" (M. Kim 2007, 492). Once Japan's war plans expanded, especially after
the Pacific War began in 1941, domestic practices were thought to be crucial to the war
effort. On the home front, women were deeply engaged in various forms of "comfort culture." In
addition to the horrific history of the "comfort women" (described in the next section), most
women were recruited to participate in farewell rituals for the Japanese soldiers heading to
the war zone in order to "comfort" them. Japan's spectacular success in military expansion
convinced some Koreans that supporting Japan by contributing to its war efforts would be an
expedient way for Koreans to gain power and citizenship.

BOX 8.2

A Pledge to Become a "Mother of the Imperial Army": Gender and Wartime Collaboration In the
grand scheme of total mobilization, the role of Korean intellectuals was conspicuous. A group
of Korean elites actively participated in giving public lectures and writing essays to urge
Koreans to devote themselves to the Japanese emperor and the Japanese Imperial Army. In
contemporary Korea, these elites have come to be thought of as "collaborators," and women
intellectuals are a subclass who placed special emphasis on the role of woman as mother and
housewife. The following essay by Choe Chonghủi (1912–1990), a well-known novelist, captures
how deeply the propaganda of naisen ittai penetrated into the everyday life of the Korean
populace, including little children. The title of the essay, which was published in Tae tonga
in June 1942, is "Mother of the Imperial Army." I'm trying not to be weak. I have been trying
to be strong. I'm trying hard to build up the courage and strength to block a bullet if I have
to. I would swallow fire if it would give me the strength I desire. The thing that inspired
this desire for greater courage in me was not the Sino-Japanese War [which broke out in 1937]
or Japan's military conflict with the United States and the United Kingdom. Nor was it due to
my mother's discipline or my teachers' incitements. It was my 10-year-old child, a student in
elementary school, who inspired me. This child, who usually hates being woken up in the
morning, embraces the siren signaling Emperor worship. He jumps out of bed and stands firmly
facing the East. When pictures of the Emperor or some other person in a position of leadership
appear in the newspaper, he straightens his posture and bows before them. He salutes when the
Imperial Force appears in the war news at the theatre. When the Emperor appears on screen, he
rises to his feet and removes his cap. He

(continued)
expects everyone to show respect in this way. He always says to me, "Why aren't you standing?
Stand with me."

Honestly, it has been some time since I have been able to pay the tribute as unselfconsciously
as he does it. I was reluctant to follow along in front of others, but I never tried to stop
my son. And gradually I did begin to follow his lead because I realized he was heading in the
right direction.

One day, he asked me "Mom, are you going to cry if I die in a war?"

This came out of nowhere, and I was dumbfounded. Yes, I know that he is expressing the proper
attitude, but he is my one and only child!

There is no mother who doesn't adore her child, and I wouldn't trade the world for this dear
little one. I couldn't help but be astonished and heartbroken at the thought of his death.

I was struck speechlessfor a while, and he made a face that implied he thought I was wrong.
That made me search my heart once again.

And then I embraced my boy and told him, "I won't cry because you're dying for a good cause."
And then my child came alive. He said, "Very well, then I shall sing 'My Child, You Were
Strong' for you." He rolled up his sleeves as if he were getting ready to run onto the
battlefield at that very moment.

I forgot my concerns, and I just hugged my son tightly. "I won't just sing. If you die in war,
I'll dance in your honor." I looked at him with a smile as big and bright as the one he was
giving me..

Let's fulfill the wishes of our precious sons. Let's become women who follow the will of God.
This will make us good mothers. Is it so difficult to entrust our sons to the nation? Women in
every other nation on the face of the earth do so. Why don't we do what they do? We have all
the same features that they have. Please, I beg of you, reform yourself to become a strong
mother who never has to be told by her son, "Mom, you're wrong." I pledge to become such a
mother. I make that promise to God. As the old adage says, "A woman is weak but a mother is
strong." (Applause)

Sex Slavery: The "Comfort Woman" System

In times of war, unspeakable violence is often visited upon women and children. During the
Pacific War, one of history's most appalling examples of this truism was perpetrated against
the women of Asia. As many as two hundred thousand Asian women were drafted into service in
military brothels for Japanese soldiers throughout Asia and the Pacific. The vast majority of
these individuals, between 80 and 90 percent, were Korean women, most of whom came from
impoverished peasant families. Although "sexual slavery by the Japanese military" would be a
more precise label, the euphemistic term "comfort women" (wianbu) has come to be more widely
used. The horrific experiences that thousands of women underwent came to be widely known only
during the early 1990s, and they remain a critical unresolved "historical problem" in the
relations between Japan and neighboring Asian countries. The lack of a formal apology and
proper reparations to the victims of the wartime sexual slavery remains a source of tension to
this day.

The issue of military sexual slavery must be understood in the context of Japan's total
mobilization campaign and its imperial ambitions over Asia and the Pacific. During the
Japanese occupation of Nanjing in 1937, members of the Japanese military committeda massive
number of civilian rapes. This caused alarm within the military, and in response the general
staff devised a plan that involved the operation of military brothels to "comfort" soldiers
and build morale. Military brothels had been built by the Japanese military as early as 1905,
but it was after the Nanjing Massacre that military brothels were more systematically
established in Japanese-occupied territories, including Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, the
Philippines, Okinawa, Manchuria, China, and the Pacific islands.

The Japanese government has denied playing an active role in the establishment and
proliferation of military brothels during the Pacific War. However, in his 1978 memoir,
entitled "Nijūsansai de sanzennin no sōshikikan" (Commander of 3,000 men at age 23), Nakasone
Yasuhiro, who served as prime minister from 1982 to 1987, offered a depiction of the military
sexual slavery system. In 1942 he was a lieutenant paymaster in Japan's Imperial Navy,
stationed at Balikpapan on the island of Borneo. His brief was to oversee and complete the
construction of an airfield; however, his men were consumed with gambling, fighting, and
sexual misconduct, slowing the progress of the project. To better manage these distractions,
he decided to build a brothel. His "success in procuring four Indonesian women 'mitigated the
mood' of his troops so well that he was commended in a naval report, according to a New York
Times article published on November 4,

2014. Nakasone's solution was replicated by thousands of Japanese officers
in Japanese encampments throughout Asia and the Pacific. Those brothels were under direct
orders and received financial support from the Japanese Ministry of the Army and the Ministry
of the Navy. They were largely managed by the Japanese army, although some were run by
civilians. Some already established brothels were conscripted for use by the military as well.
Many young girls and women were forcibly drafted or kidnapped to work in these military
brothels, while others were lured by local agents with false promises of good jobs in
factories. Some have argued that there were also other women who "chose to leave home, not out
of economic necessity but in search of independence and freedom from domestic violence" (Soh
2004, 170). Most of the girls pressed into service were between eleven and twenty-four years
of age. It is said that Korean girls were particularly targeted because strict adherence to
Confucian ideology meant that most young Korean women who had not married were virgins. There
were even "virgin clubs" in the southwestern provinces of Korea, from which a large number of
girls were drafted to work at the military brothels.

At these brothels, referred to as "comfort stations," each woman was assigned to a very small
compartment in a shanty where she was forced to have intercourse with visiting Japanese
soldiers. Those who were not obedient were beaten, burned, or sometimes stabbed by the
soldiers. Brothels were strictly regulated in terms of allotted time, fees, and other rules.
In particular, in order to protect soldiers from contracting venereal diseases, women were
periodically checked and treated by visiting doctors. When they contracted a venereal disease,
they were given an injection known as "No. 606"-Salvarsan, a notorious antibiotic that
contained arsenic and also worked to prevent pregnancy.

According to testimony of both soldiers and victims, after the Japanese were defeated in World
War II, many of the women who had worked in the military brothels were either forced to commit
suicide or sealed in caves and left to die. Others were simply abandoned, left stranded
wherever they were, generally thousands of miles from their homes. Some women managed to get
back home despite the obstacles they encountered on the way. Once they had arrived home,
however, they were not welcomed by their families. Instead, they were stigmatized as "dirty
women" because of the work they had been forced into at the brothels. Abandoned by their own
families and scarred by the sexual and medical abuse they had suffered in the military
brothels, these women were largely unable to lead normal lives. For decades they lived on the
margins of society, ostracized, completely forgotten, erased from history, just barely
scratching out a survival existence.

It took more than fifty years to bring out the long-suppressed history of these women. In 1990
South Korean feminist scholars and activists succeeded in breaking the long silence of the
comfort women by founding the Korean Council for the Women Drafted into Military Sexual
Slavery by Japan. The council made the following demands of the Japanese government:

1. Acknowledgment of the Japanese government's crimes against the former military sex slaves
2. Disclosure of the complete details of those crimes
3. A formal apology for the crimes
4. Erection of a memorial for victims
5. Payment of reparations to the victims and their families 6. Inclusion of the history of military sexual slavery in Japanese school textbooks and educational curricula
7. Appropriate punishment of the criminals (Park 1997, 109)
the In 1991 Kim Haksun (1924-1997), a former comfort woman, was first to come forward to tell
her story in public. (see Box 8.3). Gradually other comfort women followed suit, and
eventually they filed a landmark lawsuit against Japan "for drafting them into service for the
sexual satiation of the Japanese soldiers during the Pacific War," although ultimately there
was no resolution to the case. In 1993, based on a two-year government investigation, Chief
Cabinet Secretary Kono Yohei made an official statement that women were indeed forced to work
in the brothels; however, the statement did not explicitly state that the Japanese military
was directly involved. Conservative Japanese politicians have continued to assert that comfort
women were merely paid prostitutes and the Japanese government was not legally responsible for
setting up comfort stations. Those politicians have vehemently rejected any demand for a
formal apology. Many Japanese political leaders, including prime ministers, have regularly
visited the Yasukuni Shrine, a shrine commemorating the war dead, including a number of high-
profile war criminals, which stirs further outrage among people in Asia and beyond.

In addition to the controversy over a formal apology and appropriate reparations, it is worth
mentioning that there were major differences between the postwar tribunals in Europe and those
held in Asia on the issue of reparations to the former comfort women. In 1948 the Batavia
Court charged thirteen Japanese soldiers with conscripting into sexual service Dutch women who
were living in Indonesia at that time. Three of those soldiers were ultimately executed. In
contrast, no charge has ever been brought to the Tokyo War Crimes Trials for the sexual
enslavement of Asian women (Choi 1997, vi). The issue of comfort women has remained a thorny
issue in Asia because of the Japanese government's persistent denial of involvement in the
trafficking of Asian women for the purpose of sexual slavery and its refusal to offer proper
reparations to the victims.

In a significant way, the military sexual slavery system during World War II was far from a
singular tragedy. It can be understood in a larger historical, political, and cultural
context. As anthropologist Sarah Soh argues, Korean comfort.women embody the issue of
"gendered structural violence" because "the wartime exploitation and lifelong suffering of
Korean survivors arose not only within the comfort women system and the broader parameters of
Japanese colonialism and fifteen years of war, but also within Korean patriarchy and its
political economy under colonial rule" (Soh 2008, xii-xii).

BOX 8.3

Testimony of a Former "Comfort Woman," Kim Haksun

In.1991 Kim Haksun was the first of the Korean comfort women to come forward in public to
share her story. The following is a brief description of the life of Kim Haksun. Parts of her
testimony were drawn from True Stories of the Korean Comfort Women (Howard 1995).

Kim Haksun was born in 1924, in Jilin, Manchuria. Unfortunately, her father died soon after
her birth. Unable to find means to support the family in Manchuria, Kim's mother decided to
move back to P'yŏngyang, where Kim grew up and attended a missionary school. Kim's mother
remarried when Kim was fourteen, and Kim was sent to a foster family that trained kisaeng
(entertainment girls). Although she graduated from the kisaeng academy after two years'
training, she was only seventeen years of age, too too young to be licensed to work in a
kisaeng house. In 1941, her foster father took her to Beijing in the hope that she would be
able to find work there.While they were in Beijing her foster father was taken away by
Japanese soldiers on allegations of "spying," and she was sent to a house used as a comfort
station near a Japanese military unit in Tiebizhen, China. On her first night there she was
raped twice by the Japanese officer who had arrested her foster father.

Kim recalls that women at the comfort station served seven or eight Japanese soldiers a day,
depending on the military activities that the soldiers had been assigned. The women were
forced to have intercourse with the soldiers even during their menstruation. Some soldiers
were extremely demanding and violent. A military doctor routinely visited the comfort station
once a

KOREA

Celebrating the 1,000th protest on December 14, 2011: This weekly protest began on January 8,
1992, and has continued on every Wednesday in front of the Japanese embassy in Seoul. The
protesters call for aformal apology and proper reparations to the victims of wartime sexual
slavery. At this 1000th protest, a statue of a "comfort woman" was unveiled. Several surviving
"comfort women" were present at this rally. week to give check-ups. When he detected something
wrong, he would inject the women with No. 606. Kim heard from a fellow comfort woman that
rankand-file soldiers paid 1.5 yen a visit and the officers 8 yen to stay the whole night;
however, she never received any money.

One day she and some other women were asked to pack quickly, and they were moved to a new,
more remote location. There she met a Korean peddler who managed to enter her room when the
Japanese soldiers were on an expedition. She begged him to take her with him, and he helped
her escape the comfort station. In 1942 they settled in Shanghai, managing a pawn shop. She
gave birth to her two children there. They came back to Korea in 1946 after Korea's liberation
from Japanese control, but tragedy ensued. Her daughter died during an outbreak of cholera,
and in 1953 her husband was killed in an accident. Kim describes how she felt after his death:
I had suffered so much, living with this man who had supposedly been my husband. When he was
drunk and aggressive, because he knew that I had been a comfort woman, he would insult me with
words that had cut me to the quick. After we had returned to Korea I didn't want

(continued)
him to come near me. My life seemed to be wretched. I had refused to do as I was told, and I
received more and more abuse from him. When he called me a dirty bitch or a prostitute in
front of my son, I cursed him. (Quoted in Howard 1995, 39)

Kim drifted from one place to another, eking out a meager living to support her son and
herself. Tragically, her son drowned while swimming when he was in elementary school. After
that, in despair over her daily hardships, she made repeated attempts to end her life. But she
had a chance encounter with a woman who had suffered through the aftermath of the atomic bombs
being dropped on Japan, someone with whom she shared a great deal of resentment against the
Japanese. That encounter inspired her to share her experience as a comfort woman with the
larger public. The following is the conclusion of her testimony: I find it very painful to
recall my memories. Why haven't I been able to lead a normal life, free from shame, like other
people? When I look at old women, I compare myself to them, thinking that I cannot be like
them. I want to find the people who took away my innocence and made me as I am and tear them
limb from limb. How will I ever appease my bitterness? I would like it if I didn't have to
disturb my memories any further. But once I am dead and gone, I wonder whether the Korean or
Japanese governments will give any attention to the miserable life ofa woman like me. (Quoted
in Howard 1995, 40)

CHINA

The Second World War, followed immediately by civil war between the Nationalists and
Communists in China, engulfed the country in the kind of total warfare that it had not
experienced since the Taiping wars of the midnineteenth century. It is estimated that some
twenty million Chinese died during the period of total war between 1937 and 1945, with even
greater numbers wounded or left homeless. Women were especially vulnerable to the ravages of
war. Millions were killed, raped, kidnapped, or forced into prostitution. The war disrupted or
destroyed family and social order, and in the process undermined existing gender norms, making
a full return to prewar life impossible. Women were forced into new roles and out of old
dependencies and habits. Although Japan occupied Manchuria in 1931, fighting between China and
Japan began in the north with the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, which inaugurated the invasion
of North China from Manchuria in 1937. After quickly capturing Beijing and Tianjin, Japanese
forces moved swiftly along rail lines to capture northern towns and cities. To slow the
Japanese advance, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, leader of Nationalist China, ordered the
breaking of Yellow River dikes, which caused massive flooding that drowned at least three
hundred thousand people and left more than two million homeless. The Communist Red Army built
up guerrilla bases across the north from which they launched attacks on the Japanese, aiming
to force them to retreat to the cities, leaving the countryside under the control of the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). This strategy was so effective that the Japanese responded with
a campaign of "kill all, loot all, burn all," which for three years unleashed indiscriminate
violence on civilians. The Chinese war effort was hampered by ongoing conflict between the
Nationalists (KMT)

and the Communists. Chiang Kai-shek considered the Communists to pose a greater long-term
threat to China than the Japanese, so his forces maintained an economic and military blockade
of CCP-held areas and launched military assaults on them.

The worst of the fighting took place in the Yangzi River valley. In 1937 the Japanese defeated
Nationalist forces in Shanghai after a bloody three-month battle, with horrific killing of
civilians and the loss of nearly two-thirds of the Nationalist forces. In December of that
year Japanese troops-frustrated with the unexpected strength of Chinese resistance, and primed
to see the Chinese as uncivilized and racially inferior-captured the Nationalist capital,
Nanjing, and carried out one of the worst atrocities of the war, the Nanjing Massacre, during
which they killed between 200,000 and 300,000 Chinese, most of them civilians. Nationalist
troops and the core of the government fled up the Yangzi Valley, first to Wuhan. Under siege
and heavily bombed, Wuhan fell to the Japanese by the end of 1938, and the Nationalist capital
of Free China moved to Chongqing, up the Yangzi River in Sichuan. Millions of refugees fled
Japanese-occupied areas, pouring into the southwest provinces of Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, and
Guangxi. Millions more people remained in the occupied areas, where the Japanese set up puppet
regimes governed by Chinese collaborators in Beijing and Nanjing (as they had in Manchuria
after 1931).

By the end of that year, after the Japanese occupied all of the major cities in northern,
central, and coastal China, the fighting reached a stalemate. The Japanese bombed the cities
of the Nationalist-controlled regions continuously, launching 268 bombing raids on Chongqing
alone. Throughout the war, the Japanese systematically used atrocities-including biological
warfare, poison gas, medical experimentation, and brutal occupation policies against
civilians-as a military tactic. In 1940 they started epidemics of bubonic plague in three
cities in Zhejiang province with airdrops of infected materials. In Manchuria they conducted
bacteriological warfare research on Chinese civilians at a facility named Unit 731. Many areas
of China's heartland were utterly destroyed and depopulated during the war.

Sexual Assault and Comfort Women

The horrific violence of this total war was acutely gendered, as Timothy Brook explains: Men
offighting age were shot or conscripted for labor because they were, or stood in for, the
soldiers of the nation. Women of childbearing age were raped or forced into prostitution
because they were, or stood for, the body of the nation. So rape was widely performed as a
gesture of conquest, but not simply as a release for male sexual starvation; it was an act of
humiliation. Japanese soldiers performed this act on the bodies of Chinese women, but the
target of the humiliation was Chinese men: it was proof of their impotence in all ways. (Brook
2005, 23-24)

As in Korea, the Japanese instituted a system of military sexual slavery as a tool of
conquest. In the midst of its initial assault on Shanghai in 1932, the Japanese military
established its first official "comfort station," based on the government's system of licensed
brothels that had been in operation since 1907. During the Nanjing Massacre, countless women,
including young girls and old women, were raped by Japanese soldiers, who killed many of them
and mutilated their bodies. Victims or family members who resisted rape were killed.
Westerners who witnessed the massacre and mass rape at Nanjing along with the Chinese
expressed outrage at this extreme sexual violence. Concerned about troop control and social
order in occupied zones, Japanese commanders accelerated expansion of the comfort station
system as the occupation proceeded, shipping in more women, mostly from colonized Korea, but
also from Taiwan and Japan.

Between 1932 and 1945 Japanese troops or local Chinese collaborators abducted and detained as
sexual slaves many tens of thousands of women, who were kept in more than a thousand comfort
stations set up all over occupied China. (An untold number beyond this were raped by soldiers
but not detained.) The comfort stations included both officially authorized and regulated
stations, run by the military or civilian proprietors, and makeshift stations set up by local
military units in their barracks or in a nearby building-or even in the homes of the women
themselves. Considered enemies of Japan, Chinese comfort women were subjected to sexual
brutality, beaten, bayoneted, or killed outright. Like Korean comfort women, many were
injected with toxic Salvarsan to prevent syphilis, but most contracted venereal diseases
anyway. Women who became pregnant were routinely killed. Also like their Korean counterparts,
many Chinese young women and girls were deceived with false offers of jobs as domestic
servants, nurses, and laundry women, then forced into sexual slavery by the military. But most
were abducted when Japanese troops invaded and occupied their communities, often after the
women witnessed the killing of their family members. In some areas, Chinese collaborators
actively participated in running comfort stations, while in others Chinese civilians working
in local administration under Japanese supervision ran them and were required, often under
threat of death, to recruit or force young women to work in them. Captured female resistance
fighters were also used as comfort women. After the war, as was the case in Korea, many
survivors lived in deep poverty, suffering from chronic physical and psychological problems
ranging from post-traumatic stress disorder to injuries to the uterine tract. Many were unable
to bear children, exacerbating their poverty and social isolation. Chinese survivors were
often vilified as women lacking in virtue who had collaborated with the enemy. Many were
targeted for persecution during the numerous political campaigns of the Mao era, 1949 to 1976
(see Chapters 9 and 10), and sentenced to hard labor or imprisonment as counterrevolutionary
traitors. Many committed suicide (Qiu 2014, 7-12).

Women and the War of Resistance

During the war, official discourse about women's place in society took a conservative turn in
areas under Japanese rule, the collaborationist regimes in Manchukuo (Manchuria) and Central
China, and regions under Nationalist government control. While state rhetoric emphasized the
importancee of traditional virtues of female self-sacrifice for family and society, it also
sanctioned a public role for women that extended their domestic nurturing duties into work in
nursing, education, and relief efforts. In occupied China, many women became active in
religiously inspired redemptive societies such as the Morality Society (Daodehui),which ran
schools, clinics, and lecture halls to promote moral reform and syncretic ideas of spiritual
salvation. Large numbers of women joined the World Women's Red Swastika Society, modeled on
the Western Red Cross Society, founded in 1932 to manage schools, carry out relief work, and
even conduct research on women's issues. (The swastika was an ancient Buddhist symbol, and its
use was not at all related to German Nazism.) Founded before the war, these popular societies
with their apolitical and socially conservative message flourished under wartime conditions of
censorship and political repression. Although politically tainted because of their
accommodation or outright collaboration with the Japanese, they were important vehicles for
encouraging women's activity outside the home (Duara 2004). Women were also active
participants in, and leaders of, resistance efforts in occupied and unoccupied China. In
Communist and Nationalist-controlled regions, authorities promoted a militarized lifestyle
emphasizing asceticism and self-sacrifice for the nation. Female and male students underwent
military training in their schools, and tens of thousands of young women and men volunteered
as health and social workers to assist with refugees or joined drama troupes to promote the
war effort. Women raised money and in-kind donations for the war effort, nursed wounded
veterans and provided support for their families, and engaged in relief work, child care, and
education. Women even fought as irregular soldiers in many areas (Li 2010).

Nationalist Party propaganda during the war held up as national heroines New Women who worked
to save the nation. Chiang Kai-shek's wife, Song Meiling (1897-2003), a graduate of Wellesley
College in Massachusetts and a Christian, was the chief model of patriotic womanhood for Free
China. She directed the Nationalist Party's New Life Movement, which was launched in 1934 to
promote a syncretic blend of Confucian and Christian values of female duty, family hierarchy,
and obedience to state authority as the moral foundation of a nation challenged by growing
leftist critiques of the regime and by the Japanese threat. As the war intensified, she led
projects to establish schools for war orphans, train women for wartime jobs, and provide
refugee relief. Charismatic, elegant, and fluent in English, she also played a major role in
Nationalist government diplomacy during the war, addressing the U.S. Congress in 1943 to
appeal for financial aid in the war effort and authoring numerous articles on the war
situation in China for the American public.

In the midst of the assault on Nanjing, a handfulof Westerners in the city established a safe
zone for refugees that encompassed the American embassy and several missionary schools as well
as Nanjing University, and they negotiated with the Japanese to recognize it as a neutral
area. Jinling Women's College, founded by missionaries, was designated specifically as a
refugee camp for women and children, sheltering and providing medical assistance to more than
ten thousand people. The efforts there were led by its acting president, American missionary
Minnie Vautrin (1886-1941), and Tsen Shui-fang (1875-1969), the college nurse and director of
its dormitories. The diaries kept by these two women, both of whom had refused to evacuate,
provide poignant accounts of the atrocities committed by Japanese troops and of heroic efforts
to protect civilians. These two women were in charge of the refugee camp and often personally
guarded the front gate against incursions, although troops frequently invaded the campus and
killed or kidnapped residents. When the safety zone ceased to exist under Japanese pressure in
1938, the school focused on refugee relief efforts (Hu and Zhang 2010, 5-13). Another national
heroine was Shi Liang (1900-1985), an activist lawyer from a literati family and one of the
first Chinese women to graduate from law school. In the early years of the war, she led the
countrywide effort to establish women's branches of the National Salvation Association (which
promoted military resistance to Japanese encroachment), an activity for which she was arrested
in 1936, when Chiang Kai-shek was still opposed to resisting Japan. After her release from
prison in 1937, she threw herself into the war effort, moving to Wuhan to organize women there
through the National Salvation Association. In 1938, during the ten months when Wuhan served
as the wartime capital after the fall of Nanjing, major relief efforts were launched from the
city. Shi Liang maintained close relationships with the most powerful women in the country,
including the Song sisters: Song Meiling (wife of Chiang Kai-shek), Song Qingling (widow of
Sun Yat-sen), and Song Ailing (wife of H. H. Kong, a banker who was the wealthiest man in
China).

In 1938, as the refugee crisis worsened, Shi Liang lobbied through this network of powerful
women to get the issue of refugee relief on the government's agenda, forming a political
coalition that included not only KMT women but also Communists such as Long March veteran Deng
Yingchao (whose husband, future premier Zhou Enlai, was in charge of the CCP's operations in
Nationalist-controlled regions). Her efforts resulted in the creation of the woman-run
National Relief Committee and the Wartime Child Welfare Committee, which became a model for
later child welfare organizations in the People's Republic of China and Taiwan. As the war
dragged on, more than forty child care centers run by women were set up by the Nationalist
Party in the southwest, providing care and education for hundreds of thousands of children.
Song Meiling visited many of these and gave speeches to support the effort. In 1938 Shi Liang
also organized a national women's committee to mobilize women for the war effort through
public rallies. She would later serve as the first minister of justice in the People's
Republic of China, from 1949 to 1959 (MacKinnon 2008, 55-59).

After the fall of Wuhan, more than six hundred private industries and some fifty schools and
colleges moved their entire operations to the southwest. Many teachers and students from
universities and schools in occupied areas, including many girls' middle schools and colleges,
migrated inland together to Nationalist-controlled areas. The Southwest Associated University
in Kunming, Yunnan, was the wartime union of Beijing, Qinghua, and Nankai Universities. It
sheltered many of the country's most respected academics and students. Middle schools formed
similar associations. Many single women moved west with their schools and workplaces as those
relocated away from the front lines. A number of these schools later became hotbeds of
political opposition to the Nationalist regime as repression of dissent against the
Nationalists deepened during the war.

Transformations of Family Life

In occupied China, the status of women deteriorated. Epidemics of malaria and other diseases
were common amid the wartime chaos. Women, children, and the elderly were particularly
vulnerable to disease, starvation, and exposure. At least a hundred million people fled to the
interior of the country to escape the violence and chaos of the occupied areas. Women made up
at least half of the total number of refugees. Many would never return to their homes. For
married women who fled with their husbands, this often meant permanent separation from their
natal families.

Family life was utterly transformed by the war, though the changes varied by region. In
occupied areas, the threat of mass rape and kidnapping caused many families to increase the
sequestering of women at home. Yet many women were forced to leave home as refugees or to find
work. All over China, war tore families apart, forced women into prostitution, and led to the
abandonment of children and the elderly as able-bodied women and men left to fight or find
work. As in most war-torn countries, the number of unmarried women and widows rose
significantly. In many occupied areas, women outnumbered men, reversing China's long-standing
deficit of women. Many women were left to support their families on their own when their
husbands, fathers, and sons went off to fight or were killed by the Japanese. Soldiers'
contact with and remittances of pay to their families were Chinese women receive basic
training in guerilla warfare about 1939.

rare. Many women had no idea whether their menfolk were still alive, and there was little if
any support for war widows.

Wartime economic collapse, marked by hyperinflation and depression, posed a different kind of
threat to family patriarchy, as even husbands who were at home were unable to support their
families financially. Legal case records from Beijing, for example, document widespread
marital conflict over such economic failure, with many women deserting destitute husbands or
suing to divorce them. A vastly expanded modern transportation system of roads and railroads
facilitated the quest for autonomy of a growing number of runaway wives, while also fueling
expansion of the traffic in women and children. Growing numbers of migrants to cities such as
Beijing clustered in crowded tenement neighborhoods, where women developed community support
networks and pursued nonmarital sexual relationships that in many ways substituted for tenuous
or collapsed family structures (Ma 2015).

War Work

In both occupied and unoccupied China, as in Japan and Korea, war increased both the
opportunity for paid work and the necessity for women to join the workforce. Industries that
relocated to the interior increased the demand for female factory workers while men were
occupied as soldiers. Many rural girls in the southwest who had never left their villages
moved to cities such as Chongqing to work. Educated women took up new kinds of jobs in relief
and refugee work, journalism, and government. Refugee women and children were hired to do work
such as sewing or making straw sandals for soldiers. Nationalist government publications
promoted the image of the career woman working to support the war effort. For many young,
single women, the chaos, displacement, and weakening of family authority caused by the war
created unprecedented freedom to choose careers and marriage partners. In the wartime capital
of Chongqing, by 1945 nearly 75 percent of the city's women were employed outside the home in
industry, commerce, or the service sector. More than thirteen thousand women labored in cotton
mills that had been relocated, along with other factories, from the coastal regions occupied
by the Japanese. These included some of the Chinese-owned mills that had employed most women
workers in Shanghai before the war. Though familiar in large coastal cities, the participation
of women in factory work was new to many regions and even at the height of the war was the
subject of much controversy. In response to calls for women to stay home and focus on their
duties as "worthy wives and good mothers" the government banned discrimination against women
in public service and affirmed the patriotism of women workers, promoting the slogan "Big
Brother goes to the battleground, Big Sister joins the factory; Big Brother kills the enemy at
the front, Big Sister works hard producing at the Rear; the Front and Rear are united, driving
off the foreign devils to enjoy the peace" (quoted in Howard 2013, 1903). The Women's Advisory
Committee of the General Association for the Advancement of the New Life Movement, an
organization in which both Nationalist and Communist women participated under the terms of the
Second United Front during the war, ran education campaigns among women factory workers, most
of whom were young and recently arrived from the surrounding countryside. Female instructors
taught literacy and the values of the New Life Movement: diligence, patriotism, and respect
for authority. However, Communist organizers working under the committee's auspices also
mentored workers, often through networks of sworn sisterhoods, on how to present their
grievances about harsh working conditions and inequalities in treatment of workers and the
mostly male technical and administrative staff. Empowered by their newly acquired literacy and
class consciousness, women workers in Chongqing engaged in frequent strikes, slowdowns, and
other forms of protest (Howard 2013).

In Shanghai, the textile mills that employed most women workers in the city continued to
operate in the early years of Japanese occupation. Wartime inflation fed a boom in production
of cloth and yarn and led to soaring profits for British, American, Japanese, and Chinese
companies. But many workers fled the occupied areas of the city to live in refugee camps in
the International Settlement. With America's entry into the war, the Japanese took over the
International Settlement and all textile mills within it. Textile production plummeted, and
the number of women workers dropped to below 4,000 from the prewar high of over 116,00o. Many
factories were repurposed to sew military uniforms. Many unemployed women returned to their
home villages during the war, but those who stayed in the city survived however they could,
through work such as smuggling in rice from the suburbs, collecting garbage, pulling carts,
and growing vegetables.

During the war, the YWCA in Shanghai linked up with the National Salvation Movement, using its
night schools to educate women about the Japanese invasion and promote resistance. They
organized patriotic schools in refugee camps. Many workers joined the Working Women's
Battlefront Service Unit, which sent teams of women in military uniforms out to work with army
units, helping with propaganda in local villages, nursing of wounded soldiers, and camp chores
(Honig 1986, 223-224). Under the Second United Front, the previously outlawed CCP was
legalized in Nationalist-controlled regions, so the Communists took up open mobilization of
urban workers again. Communist organizers encouraged women workers to subvert production in
Japanese factories by stealing cloth, yarn, and food, setting the machines to run slowly or
stopping them, deliberately wasting materials, and producing shoddy cloth (Honig 1986,
228–229). Although the effects of such sabotage on Japanese production are unclear, the Party
gained a significant foothold among women workers through these efforts. Outside of industrial
centers, women in most of the country, including cities such as Beijing, still had few
opportunities for factory work and faced strong social disapproval for leaving home to work in
any kind of job in public. Forced by dire circumstances during the war to earn money for their
families, most women in such regions engaged in various combinations of petty trading,
brokering, domestic service, home handicraft production, black market trading, trafficking,
and prostitution. Through these activities women were crucial to the functioning of the
informal economy, through which large portions of the population survived (Ma 2015).

Wartime Culture

Women were prominent in the dynamic wartime popular culture. In the (mostly male-authored)
literature of resistance written during the war, women often appeared as prostitutes or rape
victims, embodying the violation of the Chinese nation, as traditional heroines whose chastity
and filial piety exemplified service to the nation, and sometimes as women warriors in the
traditional mode of Mulan. Women also contributed to wartime culture as writers. In the
context of Japanese censorship in Shanghai, women writers turned their focus to domestic
themes of family life, female identity, and survival. Many expressed a sense of urgency,
capturing their perceptions and experiences in writing as their world was falling apart around
them. Su Qing wrote: The world has gone crazy. Distress, agitation, depression, and a bizarre
joy characterize our mental state. Sometimes it is like dancing on top of a mountain and other
times it is like building a jade palace on thin ice. I know only too well that everything is
going to collapse soon, but I still hope to grasp this moment and seek serenity and
fulfillment right away! Otherwise what am I going to do with these few surviving moments? So I
have chosen writing and publishing to consume my time.. I want to survive my time. I want to
live, and I want to live in a way that most satisfies myself.

(Quoted in Huang 2005, 25)

Women such as Su articulated a new mode of femininity, focused on individual expression and
the preservation of self in a dangerous time when life itself was tenuous. Eileen Chang, the
most prominent of these writers, commented, "An individual can afford to wait, but an era is
transient. Things are being torn apart, and an even larger destruction is on its way.. Make
yourself famous as early as possible! If success comes too late, it will not be as
enjoyable..Hurry! Hurry! Otherwise it will be too late! Too late!" (quoted in Huang 2005, 21).

Yet many women who contributed to the lively press culture in occupied Shanghai emphasized
that individual opportunity functioned for the good of the society. One woman, He Jiashui,
wrote to a Shanghai journal: The editor might want the contributors to describe their
miseries, but I have no miseries to come to terms with. I know I am expected to recount the
unequal treatment I have experienced, but I have been treated well anywhere I have been, much
better than I deserve. This is a turbulent time; the conflicts between evil and good forces
are certainly fiercer than in normal times. There are cannibalistic elements in human
relations, but there are also friendship,

CHINA

integrity, and generosity.. During a turbulent time, talents are in great demand, and few can
complain that they have no opportunities to make use of their talents.. Women often take great
advantage of this particular time. For some reason, men of our time feel sorry and are obliged
to respect women's rights. In any case, conscientious people can always find a way to be
constructive for [the good of] society. (Quoted in Huang 2005, 48-49)

War created misery for many and opportunity for some, but for most, life was utterly
transformed.

Women in Yenan

In the fall of 1935, survivors of the CCP's Long March (see Chapter 5) set up a guerilla base
in a poor, remote, mountainous region in northern Shaanxi province, centered on the town of
Yenan. This was the headquarters for the CCP during the war, from 1936 to 1945. Throughout the
war, in Yenan and other base areas under the control of its Red Army, the CCP built new
military and state structures to mobilize the population to join the fight against the
Japanese. The Party perfected the political mode of the "mass line," a strategy of going down
to the villages to listen directly to the concerns of the peasant masses and then
incorporating them into policy. The CCP's populist regime gave many the hope of democratic
change, but the Party's main goal was to build a new state, based on broad peasant support,
that marginalized the old landlord elites as class enemies of the masses of poor peasants.
Gender norms in the region were, ironically, particularly conservative. In this context, Party
cadres deemphasized promotion of women's rights, as they had in the Jiangxi Soviet, out of
concern for alienating the male population. In 1936 the CCP called for development of mass
organizations (including women's associations) in the northwest border regions, but at the
same time it warned of potential divisiveness if women's rights and marriage reforms were
pushed too far. Women's associations grew very slowly during the war years, and they placed
the greatest emphasis on harnessing women's labor to help the war effort by increasing women's
role in agricultural production and in the revival of household textile production (which had
diminished due to competition from industrially produced textiles). In 1938 these associations
were consolidated into the Rear Area Enemy Resistance Association, which set up training
centers for women cadres to teach local women Party policy and to recruit them as activists in
their communities. They organized women into cooperatives to make shoes, blankets, socks, and
uniforms for the Red Army. Women were also encouraged to work in the fields, both to make up
for the absence of men and to promote local economic self-sufficiency. Women leaders noted at
the time that these enhanced economic roles increased women's status and autonomy within the
family. The Party also encouraged women to participate in political activities as voters and
candidates in local elections. In the 1941 election, 8 percent of township council seats were
held by women-far less than the 25 percent in the Jiangxi Soviet (see Chapter 5). There were
about seven thousand women Party members in Yenan in 1937, about 15 percent of total Party
membership, though most were students and cadres who had come from other regions (Johnson
1983).

As the military and economic crisis deepened in 1941–1942, the Party came to focus exclusively
on women's roles in the "production war." It warned cadres to focus on family harmony and
wifely loyalty until the dire circumstances of poor men were alleviated. It directed that
women's political participation and other rights should remain only slogans and, after 1943,
that women should not be summoned for political meetings that would detract from their
production. For cadres in Yenan, the Party itself replaced family authority in key ways,
arranging marriages and assigning work. With everyone mobilized for the war effort, a new
militarized social life took shape in which women and men wore military uniforms, took
military training, and participated in military missions and underground Party work behind
Japanese lines. Everyone was subjected to strict Party discipline.

In 1942, as the Nationalist blockade was reaching a critical point, Mao launched a campaign to
silence his critics in the Party, unify cadres in support of his ideological line, and
indoctrinate the tens of thousands of new recruits, mostly young students and intellectuals,
who were fleeing KMT-controlled areas to join the CCP in Yenan. This was called the
"rectification campaign." Party members who had criticized Mao or his policies in Yenan were
singled out for public criticism in "struggle sessions" and banished to remote villages to be
reeducated by doing manual labor and living with peasants. Thousands of people deemed to be
unrepentant were executed.

A defining moment of this campaign was the criticism of the writer Ding Ling (see Chapter 6),
which clarified the Party's stance toward women and intellectuals. After the Nationalists
executed her common-law husband (she shunned the notion of civil marriage as legalized
prostitution), she joined the Communist Party, sent her infant son to live with her mother in
Hunan, and took up work editing a journal for the Party-sponsored League of Left Wing Writers.
In 1933 the Nationalist secret police kidnapped her and held her under house arrest for three
years. In 1937 she escaped to Yenan, where she took up cultural propaganda work and helped
organize women's war work.

On International Women's Day in 1942 she published an essay, "Thoughts on March 8, in which
she criticized gender discrimination among Communist cadres and contradictions in their
attitudes about women.

BOX 8.4

Ding Ling's "Thoughts on March 8"

Ding Ling's essay described the paradox of gender politics in Yenan: the Party declared women
to be equal to men and expected them to participate fully in the work of revolution, yet their
happiness and effectiveness as cadres was hampered by the persistence of sexist assumptions
about marriage among male cadres and by women's own emotionality and unrealistic romanticism.
She wrote, "When will it no longer be necessary to attach special weight to the word 'woman'
and to raise it specially?.. Women in [Yenan] are happier than women elsewhere in China..It
doesn't seem to surprise anyone that women make up a big proportion of the staff in the
hospitals, sanatoria, and clinics, but they are inevitably the subject of conversation, as a
fascinating problem, on every conceivable occasion. Moreover, all kinds of women comrades are
often the target of deserved criticism." As in her early fiction, Ding Ling posited an
essentialist view of women and her natural ability as a woman to see and criticize their
weaknesses: "I myself am a woman, so I understand the failings of women better than others.
But I also have a deeper understanding of what they suffer."

The heart of the essay described the contradictions of sexual politics in Yenan that made it
impossible for women to avoid accusations of selfishness and political backwardness. As they
tried to balance Party work with marriage and motherhood, women comrades faced gossip and
ridicule. They were criticized for their marriage choices, but slandered for remaining single.
"I am the first to admit it is a shame when a man's wife is not progressive and retards his
progress. But let us consider to what degree [these women] are backward. Before marrying, they
were inspired by the desire to soar in the heavenly heights and lead a life ofbitter struggle.
They got married partly because of physiological necessity and partly as a response to sweet
talk about 'mutual help. Thereupon they are forced to toil away and become 'Noras returned
home." When

(continued)
they had children, they were "publicly derided" for giving up their autonomy and productive
work for domestic life, yet if women comrades employed nannies, then "behind their backs there
would also be the most incredible gossip and whispering campaigns." She stated that divorce
was almost always initiated by the husband and the pretext was "invariably the wife's
political backwardness." Yet women who took their children to nurseries or tried to have
abortions were asked, "Why did you get married in the first place?" She concluded, "Under
these conditions it is impossible for women to escape this destiny of backwardness. When women
capable of working sacrifice their careers for the joys of motherhood, people always sing
their praises. But after ten years or so, they have no way of escaping the tragedy of
'backwardness' [i.e., divorce]"

She concluded the essay with advice for her fellow women comrades to take care of their health
and emotional well-being: "Use your brain and make a habit of doing so.. It is the best way of
avoiding the pitfalls of sweet words and honeyed phrases, of being sidetracked by petty gains,
of wasting our emotions and wasting our lives.. Aware, modern women should identify and cast
off all their rosy illusions. Happiness is to take up the struggle in the midst of the raging
storm and not to pluck the lute in the moonlight or recite poetry among the blossoms... Not to
suffer is to become degenerate. The strength to carry on should be nurtured through the
quality of perseverance. People without great aims and ambitions rarely have the firmness of
purpose that does not covet petty advantages or see a comfortable existence. But only those
who have aims and ambitions for the benefit, not of the individual, but of humankind as a
whole can persevere to the end" (Ding 1990, 317-319). During the rectification campaign, Ding
Ling was forced to apologize for her statements, though she did not retract them, and was
banned from Party work for two years. The head of the Women's Department castigated her and
like-minded women cadres for their "outdated" views, which did not recognize that equality of
the sexes had been fully established in Yenan and which instead advocated a one-sided feminism
that undermined Party unity (Johnson 1983). Ironically, in her attempt to reconcile feminist
goals with the imperatives of nationalism and revolution, Ding Ling had already given up
bourgeois notions of individualism. The war's devastating impact on social and economic order
and ordinary family life justified the new Yenan mode of citizenship for women and men, which
was centered on sacrifice to the Party and mobilization to work, first for the war effort and
ultimately for the Communist revolution. In the new society created by revolution, women were
to be liberated by the Party to participate fully in economic and political transformation,
but not to realize feminist goals of self-fulfillment or individual autonomy.

CONNECTIONS

The turbulent years of the Great Depression and World War II, from 1931 to 1945, altered the
boundaries of nations and empires and the configurations of their alliances. They changed the
relationships of individuals to their governments through the expansion or contraction of
civic rights and the creation of welfare states. They drew women in large numbers into the
workforce of most combatant nations. And, most important for this book, they fundamentally
altered gender relations as nations responded in their own ways to these crises.

In Japan, Korea, and China, the effects of these turbulent years were not limited to the time
in which they occurred. They also produced long-lasting changes in the post-World War II era.
Depression and war forced great suffering on men, women, and children alike. Millions of
civilians died of starvation, from bombing raids, and in atrocities perpetrated by combatants.
Additional millions of men were taken away by their countries' military forces (or, in the
case of Korea, by Japan's military) to fight and often die on distant battlefields-thereby
pushing women to take up what had previously been men's civic and economic tasks. The dynamics
of societies devoid of working-age men led to changed family relationships and, in some cases,
government-paid welfare policies to support fatherless families. In addition, women either
were formally drafted into the workforce, as in Japan and Korea, or entered it because of the
need to produce for the war. In each of these countries, as well as in China and in combatant
countries outside the East Asian region, the entry of women into the paid workforce led to
long-term changes in women's attitudes about their social roles. Women often became more
independent and capable of exerting leadership in wartime neighborhood associations, allowing
some to make a leap into more public roles in the postwar years. In all three countries the
chaos of the times offered the opportunity for some women to write and express themselves,
opening new possibilities for them to be involved in cultural production even in difficult
times.

An important form of female labor that exploded on a large scale was the performance of sex
for the Japanese military. Most of this was not voluntary. Tens of thousands of women in
China, one of Japan's wartime enemies, were forced into sexual slavery; even greater numbers
of women in colonial Korea, which was not Japan's wartime enemy, suffered the same horrible
fate. The legacy of what many people today consider an unresolved war crime against Asian
victims (Caucasian "comfort women" were treated as victims, and the men who recruited them
were convicted of war crimes) continues to affect Japan's relations with Korea and China
seventy years after the end of the war. In December 2015, the foreign ministers of Japan and
South Korea made a joint statement outlining elements of an agreement to address the issue of
former Korean sex slaves. The statement included an apology on behalf of the Japanese prime
minister and a proposal for financial aid to the surviving victims. However, many legal and
political issues remain unresolved with both South Korean survivors and survivors in China,
the Philippines, and other countries, and the matter is likely to continue to be a point of
contention.

The deprivations of war made frugality a necessity, but just in case women did not get the
message that they were responsible for maintaining efficient families, in both Japan and
colonial Korea women were exhorted to practice thrift. Extravagance, women were told, was the
enemy. In the CCP areas in Yenan, women were instructed to focus on production. Hard work and
frugality continued to be honored after the war in all three societies. Some of the prewar
connections among women in the three societies were severed by the rise of Japanese militarism
in the 1930s, and these were never reestablished after the war. While ties between Japanese
and Western women were reconnected after the war, the legacy of the war made this virtually
impossible in East Asia. Only under the rubric of larger global feminisms have transnational
connections reemerged in recent years.

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

GLOBAL CONTEXT

Besse, Susan K. 2004. "Engendering Reform and Revolution in Twentieth-Century Latin America
and the Caribbean." In A Companion to Gender History, edited by Teresa A. Meade and Merry E.
Wiesner-Hanks. Oxford: Blackwell.

Clements, Barbara Evens. 2004. "Continuities Amid Change: Gender Ideas and Arrangements in
Twentieth-Century Russia and Eastern Europe." In A Companion to Gender History, edited by
Teresa A. Meade and Merry E. Wiesner-Hanks. Oxford: Blackwell.

Sowerwine, Charles and Patricia Grimshaw. 2004. "Equality and Difference in the Twentieth-
Century West: North America, Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand" In A Companion to
Gender History, edited by Teresa A. Meade and Merry E. Wiesner-Hanks. Oxford: Blackwell.

JAPAN

Ajima, Naomi. 2011. "Working Women During the Turning Point from Japanese-Style to Western-
Style Clothing" In Fashion and Luxury: Between Heritage and Innovation. Paris: Institut de la
Mode.

Brooks, Barbara. 2005. "Reading the Japanese Colonial Archive: Gender and Bourgeois Civility
in Korea and Manchuria Before 1932." In Gendering Modern Japanese History, edited by Barbara
Molony and Kathleen Uno. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Cook, Haruko Taya. 2005. "Women's Deaths as Weapons of War in Japan's 'Final Battle." In
Gendering Modern Japanese History, edited by Barbara Molony and Kathleen Uno. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Cook, Theodore F., Jr. 2005. "Making 'Soldiers': The Imperial Army and the Japanese Man in
Meiji Society and State." In Gendering Modern Japanese History, edited by Barbara Molony and
Kathleen Uno. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Earhart, David C. 2008. Certain
Victory: Images of World War II in the Japanese Media. New York: Routledge.

Frühstück, Sabine. 2014. ""The Spirit to Take Up a Gun': Militarising Gender in the Imperial
Army." In Gender, Nation and State in Modern Japan, edited by Andrea Germer, Vera Mackie, and
Ulrike Wŏhr. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. Garon, Sheldon. 1993. "Women's Groups and the Japanese
State." Journal of Japanese Studies 19, no. 1: 5-41.

Gordon, Andrew. 2011. Fabricating Consumers: The Sewing Machine in Modern Japan. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Havens, Thomas R. H. 1978. Valley of Darkness: The Japanese People and World War Two. New
York: W. W. Norton.

Horiguchi, Noriko J. 2009. "Migrant Women, Memory, and Empire in Naruse Mikio's Film
Adaptations of Hayashi Fumiko's Novels" U.S.-Japan Women's Journal 36: 42-72.. 2012. Women
Adrift: The Literature of Japan's Imperial Body. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Ichikawa, Fusae. 1932. "Dai sankai Fusen Taikai no ketsugi" [Resolutions of the Third Women's
Suffrage Convention]. Fusen 6, no. 6.

.1934. "Seisō undō no zenkokuteki kōdai to sono igi" [The national expansion and significance
of the garbage collection movement]. Fusen 8, no. 7.

-. 1935. "Shukusei senkyo no kekka" [The results of election purification]. Fusen 9, no. 10:
4-5.

-. 1938. "An Introductory Note." Japanese Women 1, no. 1:1-2
