CONNECTIONS

The turbulent years of the Great Depression and World War II, from 1931 to 1945, altered the
boundaries of nations and empires and the configurations of their alliances. They changed the
relationships of individuals to their governments through the expansion or contraction of
civic rights and the creation of welfare states. They drew women in large numbers into the
workforce of most combatant nations. And, most important for this book, they fundamentally
altered gender relations as nations responded in their own ways to these crises.

In Japan, Korea, and China, the effects of these turbulent years were not limited to the time
in which they occurred. They also produced long-lasting changes in the post-World War II era.
Depression and war forced great suffering on men, women, and children alike. Millions of
civilians died of starvation, from bombing raids, and in atrocities perpetrated by combatants.
Additional millions of men were taken away by their countries' military forces (or, in the
case of Korea, by Japan's military) to fight and often die on distant battlefields-thereby
pushing women to take up what had previously been men's civic and economic tasks. The dynamics
of societies devoid of working-age men led to changed family relationships and, in some cases,
government-paid welfare policies to support fatherless families. In addition, women either
were formally drafted into the workforce, as in Japan and Korea, or entered it because of the
need to produce for the war. In each of these countries, as well as in China and in combatant
countries outside the East Asian region, the entry of women into the paid workforce led to
long-term changes in women's attitudes about their social roles. Women often became more
independent and capable of exerting leadership in wartime neighborhood associations, allowing
some to make a leap into more public roles in the postwar years. In all three countries the
chaos of the times offered the opportunity for some women to write and express themselves,
opening new possibilities for them to be involved in cultural production even in difficult
times.

An important form of female labor that exploded on a large scale was the performance of sex
for the Japanese military. Most of this was not voluntary. Tens of thousands of women in
China, one of Japan's wartime enemies, were forced into sexual slavery; even greater numbers
of women in colonial Korea, which was not Japan's wartime enemy, suffered the same horrible
fate. The legacy of what many people today consider an unresolved war crime against Asian
victims (Caucasian "comfort women" were treated as victims, and the men who recruited them
were convicted of war crimes) continues to affect Japan's relations with Korea and China
seventy years after the end of the war. In December 2015, the foreign ministers of Japan and
South Korea made a joint statement outlining elements of an agreement to address the issue of
former Korean sex slaves. The statement included an apology on behalf of the Japanese prime
minister and a proposal for financial aid to the surviving victims. However, many legal and
political issues remain unresolved with both South Korean survivors and survivors in China,
the Philippines, and other countries, and the matter is likely to continue to be a point of
contention.

The deprivations of war made frugality a necessity, but just in case women did not get the
message that they were responsible for maintaining efficient families, in both Japan and
colonial Korea women were exhorted to practice thrift. Extravagance, women were told, was the
enemy. In the CCP areas in Yenan, women were instructed to focus on production. Hard work and
frugality continued to be honored after the war in all three societies. Some of the prewar
connections among women in the three societies were severed by the rise of Japanese militarism
in the 1930s, and these were never reestablished after the war. While ties between Japanese
and Western women were reconnected after the war, the legacy of the war made this virtually
impossible in East Asia. Only under the rubric of larger global feminisms have transnational
connections reemerged in recent years.

REFERENCES AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

GLOBAL CONTEXT

Besse, Susan K. 2004. "Engendering Reform and Revolution in Twentieth-Century Latin America
and the Caribbean." In A Companion to Gender History, edited by Teresa A. Meade and Merry E.
Wiesner-Hanks. Oxford: Blackwell.

Clements, Barbara Evens. 2004. "Continuities Amid Change: Gender Ideas and Arrangements in
Twentieth-Century Russia and Eastern Europe." In A Companion to Gender History, edited by
Teresa A. Meade and Merry E. Wiesner-Hanks. Oxford: Blackwell.

Sowerwine, Charles and Patricia Grimshaw. 2004. "Equality and Difference in the Twentieth-
Century West: North America, Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand" In A Companion to
Gender History, edited by Teresa A. Meade and Merry E. Wiesner-Hanks. Oxford: Blackwell.

JAPAN

Ajima, Naomi. 2011. "Working Women During the Turning Point from Japanese-Style to Western-
Style Clothing" In Fashion and Luxury: Between Heritage and Innovation. Paris: Institut de la
Mode.

Brooks, Barbara. 2005. "Reading the Japanese Colonial Archive: Gender and Bourgeois Civility
in Korea and Manchuria Before 1932." In Gendering Modern Japanese History, edited by Barbara
Molony and Kathleen Uno. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Cook, Haruko Taya. 2005. "Women's Deaths as Weapons of War in Japan's 'Final Battle." In
Gendering Modern Japanese History, edited by Barbara Molony and Kathleen Uno. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Cook, Theodore F., Jr. 2005. "Making 'Soldiers': The Imperial Army and the Japanese Man in
Meiji Society and State." In Gendering Modern Japanese History, edited by Barbara Molony and
Kathleen Uno. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Earhart, David C. 2008. Certain
Victory: Images of World War II in the Japanese Media. New York: Routledge.

Frühstück, Sabine. 2014. ""The Spirit to Take Up a Gun': Militarising Gender in the Imperial
Army." In Gender, Nation and State in Modern Japan, edited by Andrea Germer, Vera Mackie, and
Ulrike Wŏhr. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. Garon, Sheldon. 1993. "Women's Groups and the Japanese
State." Journal of Japanese Studies 19, no. 1: 5-41.

Gordon, Andrew. 2011. Fabricating Consumers: The Sewing Machine in Modern Japan. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Havens, Thomas R. H. 1978. Valley of Darkness: The Japanese People and World War Two. New
York: W. W. Norton.

Horiguchi, Noriko J. 2009. "Migrant Women, Memory, and Empire in Naruse Mikio's Film
Adaptations of Hayashi Fumiko's Novels" U.S.-Japan Women's Journal 36: 42-72.. 2012. Women
Adrift: The Literature of Japan's Imperial Body. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Ichikawa, Fusae. 1932. "Dai sankai Fusen Taikai no ketsugi" [Resolutions of the Third Women's
Suffrage Convention]. Fusen 6, no. 6.

.1934. "Seisō undō no zenkokuteki kōdai to sono igi" [The national expansion and significance
of the garbage collection movement]. Fusen 8, no. 7.

-. 1935. "Shukusei senkyo no kekka" [The results of election purification]. Fusen 9, no. 10:
4-5.

-. 1938. "An Introductory Note." Japanese Women 1, no. 1:1-2
