Korea

The outbreak of the second Sino-Japanese War in 1937 and the subsequent Pacific War
(1941–1945) had deep ramifications for Korean society, as Korea became the crossroads for
Japan's military ambitions throughout Asia and the Pacific. With the passage of the 1938
National General Mobilization Law, the colonial government began to regulate and deploy both
material and human resources to support Japan's "sacred war" (sŏngjŏn). Heavy industries were
actively developed to cater to the war effort. Under the slogan "Japan and Korea as a single
body" (naisen ittai), the colonial government made full use of educational and community
programs to try to turn the Korean populace into completely obedient and loyal subjects who
would be willing to sacrifice themselves for the Japanese emperor and Japan's war efforts on
the home front as well as on the battlefield. The stated aim of the Greater East Asia Co-
Prosperity Sphere propaganda campaign was to free Asian nations from the threat of Western
imperialism, but its true motivation was to secure Japan's position as the dominant power in
Asia and the Pacific in shaping the new international order. The total mobilization campaign
and the increasingly forceful assimilation policies in late colonial Korea had a significant
impact on the lives of women on all fronts-economic, political, cultural, and practical. While
the conventional ideal of woman as "wise mother, good wife" continued to be promoted, women
were made to feel that they could make a vital contribution to the war effort by saving daily
resources, sending their sons to the battlefront, working in military factories and farming
lands, serving as nurses on the battlefield, or actively collaborating with the Japanese power
in the distribution of wartime propaganda. It was also during this turbulent period that the
infamous human trafficking system, euphemistically referred to as the "comfort women" program,
was initiated, forcing a vast number of women into service as sex slaves in Japanese
encampments throughout Asia and the Pacific.

Mobilization of Women in Heavy Industries

After the Manchurian Incident in 1931, Japan set in place various policies that made the
Korean peninsula a strategic location for Japan's ambitions to become the central power in
Northeast Asia. As Japan's involvement in military excursions escalated in the late 1930s,
there was an increased demand for industrial production of goods for use by the military. Thus
a number of legal provisions were enacted to effectively recruit and draft colonized subjects
into heavy industries that served the needs of the military. For instance, the 1939 ordinance
on the National Labor Draft gave the emperor full power to conscript any of his subjects in
Japan or any of its colonies into labor that was vital to the war effort. The 1941 National
Registration System. required Korean men and women between the ages of twelve and forty "to
register with the government for potential enlistment into war-related services." Furthermore,
the Patriotic Labor Association Law of 1941 and the establishment of the Wartime Student
Organization in 1943 essentially turned secondary and vocational schools into institutes for
training laborers (J. Kim 2007, 87-89). It was within this rapid mobilization of laborers that
young girls and women were actively recruited to work in heavy industries that were needed by
the military. The Women's Labor Volunteer Corps (küllo chŏngsindae)

was one prominent organization that worked to recruit school-age girls and recent female
graduates from elementary and middle schools, as well as unmarried women over fourteen years
of age, to work in heavy industries. The promise of higher wages also attracted women who were
already in the workforce as factory workers and domestic servants. Schoolteachers, community
leaders, local representatives, government officials, and the print media were all
instrumental in mobilizing girls and young women to sign up for these new work opportunities.
Prior to the war, women laborers were largely concentrated in light industries, and that was
also true after the war; however, during wartime an unprecedented range of jobs, particularly
in heavy industries, were opened to women. According to an August 26, 1944, article in Maeil
sinbo, the official newspaper of the colonial government, women worked in "mining,
electricity, communications, machinery, aircraft production, shipbuilding, chemicals,
ceramics, carpentry, and building and construction" (J. Kim 2007, 91).

Those women laborers were stationed at factories throughout East Asia.

They underwent as much as six months of job training before commencing their work. The lives
they led in the dormitories and factories were heavily routinized. For example, at the
Fujikoshi steel factory in Toyama, Japan, both Japanese and Korean workers had a rigid daily
schedule, rising by 5:00 a.m. to greet their dormitory parents and to recite the empire
narrative (hwangminhwa sōsa in Korean; kōminka jiji in Japanese) before breakfast. They would
then report to the factory, where they would work until noon, break for lunch, then go back to
work until there was a short afternoon break at 3:00 p.m. They would then return to work until
5:00 p.m., when they would head back to the dormitory to eat dinner and be in bed by 9:00 p.m.
(J. Kim 2007, 95). These routines, as well as the radio programs and visual propaganda, such
as posters, helped to fashion the identity, mentality and lifestyle of the workers. Very
little is known about the actual lives of those women deployed to work in heavy industries in
late colonial Korea. However, the Korean labor historian Janice Kim argues that the bits of
oral histories available indicate that female workers "became more independent and powerful
through the unparalleled experience of wage work." Kim sums up, "Although oppressed and
victimized in political memory, many working women of late colonial Korea, in transcending the
boundaries of class and gender, saw themselves as pioneers" (J. Kim 2007, 99).

Wartime Domesticity

The escalating demands of the war effort, especially after the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese
War in 1937, caused Japan to seek fuller control over human and material resources in its
colonies. Various legal provisions, such as the National Spiritual Mobilization program,
enacted in 1937, and the National General Mobilization Law, passed in 1938, signaled a
dramatic shift in colonial policies. Such mobilization efforts aimed not only to advance
economic and military development in support of Japan's war but also to maximize cólonial
subjects' loyalty to the empire. Under the slogan of naisen ittai, the colonial authority
implemented policies to compel loyalty to the Japanese emperor through measures that either
eliminated old links to Korean identity and culture or established new links to Japan
(although Koreans were not invariably passive and managed to complicate the colonial policies
in a number of different ways. See Henry 2014; Kim 2013). One strategy was to introduce major
educational reforms that emphasized Japanese-language proficiency while eliminating
instruction in Korean language, history, and culture-crucial elements in constructing Korean
national identity. Other policies mandated attendance at Shinto shrines and required Koreans
to adopt Japanese names (changsi kyemyŏng). These efforts toward total mobilization were made
in virtually every domain of society-families, schools, municipal communities, neighborhood
associations, and print media. By 1940, there were some 350,000 Neighborhood Patriotic
Associations. Each association comprised ten households, and it served as the basic unit for
collecting contributions, drafting soldiers, imposing surveillance on the local community, and
mobilizing the populace for everyday rituals (such as "silent prayer time," devoted to prayers
for the safety of soldiers fighting on the front lines and the souls of those who had fallen
on the battlefield). These associations served to mobilize Koreans in the interest of the
Japanese war effort through every conceivable mechanism--formal legal measures, aesthetic
images, everyday rituals, and false promises.

During wartime the role of women underwent a major change. The traditional women's role as
homemaker and "wise mother, good wife" continued, but in times of military conflict the
services of women were needed beyond the private, domestic arena. They were expected to play
an important role for the state. The active intervention of the state in the domestic sphere
unfolded through a wide range of campaign and reform efforts. In those campaigns, traditional
Korean family life was criticized as wasteful, unscientific, and ineffective. Thus the typical
Korean home was subject to major reform, and the typical housewife was envisioned as the
central figure in enacting those reforms. At a very mundane level, women were asked to reform
their standard daily practices in a way that contributed to management of the emergency
situation. For example, instead of the traditional white clothing, they wore simple colored
clothing that would require less time and expense to maintain.

They were told that the daily diet should be minimalist-a bowl of soup and kimch'i for
breakfast, and cold rice for lunch. They had to save energy, recycle waste, eliminate
unnecessary rituals and gatherings, and work harder.

Women were also seen as the moral compass for their children, instilling in them a sense of
patriotism for the Japanese empire and fealty to the emperor. Mothers were expected to take
pride in sending their sons to war to defend the empire. The visual representations of women
in late colonial Korea often portrayed them waving Japanese flags for the war effort,
reinforcing "their important duties as individuals who could meet both the demands of the
family and the state" (M. Kim 2007, 492). Once Japan's war plans expanded, especially after
the Pacific War began in 1941, domestic practices were thought to be crucial to the war
effort. On the home front, women were deeply engaged in various forms of "comfort culture." In
addition to the horrific history of the "comfort women" (described in the next section), most
women were recruited to participate in farewell rituals for the Japanese soldiers heading to
the war zone in order to "comfort" them. Japan's spectacular success in military expansion
convinced some Koreans that supporting Japan by contributing to its war efforts would be an
expedient way for Koreans to gain power and citizenship.

BOX 8.2

A Pledge to Become a "Mother of the Imperial Army": Gender and Wartime Collaboration In the
grand scheme of total mobilization, the role of Korean intellectuals was conspicuous. A group
of Korean elites actively participated in giving public lectures and writing essays to urge
Koreans to devote themselves to the Japanese emperor and the Japanese Imperial Army. In
contemporary Korea, these elites have come to be thought of as "collaborators," and women
intellectuals are a subclass who placed special emphasis on the role of woman as mother and
housewife. The following essay by Choe Chonghủi (1912–1990), a well-known novelist, captures
how deeply the propaganda of naisen ittai penetrated into the everyday life of the Korean
populace, including little children. The title of the essay, which was published in Tae tonga
in June 1942, is "Mother of the Imperial Army." I'm trying not to be weak. I have been trying
to be strong. I'm trying hard to build up the courage and strength to block a bullet if I have
to. I would swallow fire if it would give me the strength I desire. The thing that inspired
this desire for greater courage in me was not the Sino-Japanese War [which broke out in 1937]
or Japan's military conflict with the United States and the United Kingdom. Nor was it due to
my mother's discipline or my teachers' incitements. It was my 10-year-old child, a student in
elementary school, who inspired me. This child, who usually hates being woken up in the
morning, embraces the siren signaling Emperor worship. He jumps out of bed and stands firmly
facing the East. When pictures of the Emperor or some other person in a position of leadership
appear in the newspaper, he straightens his posture and bows before them. He salutes when the
Imperial Force appears in the war news at the theatre. When the Emperor appears on screen, he
rises to his feet and removes his cap. He

(continued)
expects everyone to show respect in this way. He always says to me, "Why aren't you standing?
Stand with me."

Honestly, it has been some time since I have been able to pay the tribute as unselfconsciously
as he does it. I was reluctant to follow along in front of others, but I never tried to stop
my son. And gradually I did begin to follow his lead because I realized he was heading in the
right direction.

One day, he asked me "Mom, are you going to cry if I die in a war?"

This came out of nowhere, and I was dumbfounded. Yes, I know that he is expressing the proper
attitude, but he is my one and only child!

There is no mother who doesn't adore her child, and I wouldn't trade the world for this dear
little one. I couldn't help but be astonished and heartbroken at the thought of his death.

I was struck speechlessfor a while, and he made a face that implied he thought I was wrong.
That made me search my heart once again.

And then I embraced my boy and told him, "I won't cry because you're dying for a good cause."
And then my child came alive. He said, "Very well, then I shall sing 'My Child, You Were
Strong' for you." He rolled up his sleeves as if he were getting ready to run onto the
battlefield at that very moment.

I forgot my concerns, and I just hugged my son tightly. "I won't just sing. If you die in war,
I'll dance in your honor." I looked at him with a smile as big and bright as the one he was
giving me..

Let's fulfill the wishes of our precious sons. Let's become women who follow the will of God.
This will make us good mothers. Is it so difficult to entrust our sons to the nation? Women in
every other nation on the face of the earth do so. Why don't we do what they do? We have all
the same features that they have. Please, I beg of you, reform yourself to become a strong
mother who never has to be told by her son, "Mom, you're wrong." I pledge to become such a
mother. I make that promise to God. As the old adage says, "A woman is weak but a mother is
strong." (Applause)

Sex Slavery: The "Comfort Woman" System

In times of war, unspeakable violence is often visited upon women and children. During the
Pacific War, one of history's most appalling examples of this truism was perpetrated against
the women of Asia. As many as two hundred thousand Asian women were drafted into service in
military brothels for Japanese soldiers throughout Asia and the Pacific. The vast majority of
these individuals, between 80 and 90 percent, were Korean women, most of whom came from
impoverished peasant families. Although "sexual slavery by the Japanese military" would be a
more precise label, the euphemistic term "comfort women" (wianbu) has come to be more widely
used. The horrific experiences that thousands of women underwent came to be widely known only
during the early 1990s, and they remain a critical unresolved "historical problem" in the
relations between Japan and neighboring Asian countries. The lack of a formal apology and
proper reparations to the victims of the wartime sexual slavery remains a source of tension to
this day.

The issue of military sexual slavery must be understood in the context of Japan's total
mobilization campaign and its imperial ambitions over Asia and the Pacific. During the
Japanese occupation of Nanjing in 1937, members of the Japanese military committeda massive
number of civilian rapes. This caused alarm within the military, and in response the general
staff devised a plan that involved the operation of military brothels to "comfort" soldiers
and build morale. Military brothels had been built by the Japanese military as early as 1905,
but it was after the Nanjing Massacre that military brothels were more systematically
established in Japanese-occupied territories, including Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, the
Philippines, Okinawa, Manchuria, China, and the Pacific islands.

The Japanese government has denied playing an active role in the establishment and
proliferation of military brothels during the Pacific War. However, in his 1978 memoir,
entitled "Nijūsansai de sanzennin no sōshikikan" (Commander of 3,000 men at age 23), Nakasone
Yasuhiro, who served as prime minister from 1982 to 1987, offered a depiction of the military
sexual slavery system. In 1942 he was a lieutenant paymaster in Japan's Imperial Navy,
stationed at Balikpapan on the island of Borneo. His brief was to oversee and complete the
construction of an airfield; however, his men were consumed with gambling, fighting, and
sexual misconduct, slowing the progress of the project. To better manage these distractions,
he decided to build a brothel. His "success in procuring four Indonesian women 'mitigated the
mood' of his troops so well that he was commended in a naval report, according to a New York
Times article published on November 4,

2014. Nakasone's solution was replicated by thousands of Japanese officers
in Japanese encampments throughout Asia and the Pacific. Those brothels were under direct
orders and received financial support from the Japanese Ministry of the Army and the Ministry
of the Navy. They were largely managed by the Japanese army, although some were run by
civilians. Some already established brothels were conscripted for use by the military as well.
Many young girls and women were forcibly drafted or kidnapped to work in these military
brothels, while others were lured by local agents with false promises of good jobs in
factories. Some have argued that there were also other women who "chose to leave home, not out
of economic necessity but in search of independence and freedom from domestic violence" (Soh
2004, 170). Most of the girls pressed into service were between eleven and twenty-four years
of age. It is said that Korean girls were particularly targeted because strict adherence to
Confucian ideology meant that most young Korean women who had not married were virgins. There
were even "virgin clubs" in the southwestern provinces of Korea, from which a large number of
girls were drafted to work at the military brothels.

At these brothels, referred to as "comfort stations," each woman was assigned to a very small
compartment in a shanty where she was forced to have intercourse with visiting Japanese
soldiers. Those who were not obedient were beaten, burned, or sometimes stabbed by the
soldiers. Brothels were strictly regulated in terms of allotted time, fees, and other rules.
In particular, in order to protect soldiers from contracting venereal diseases, women were
periodically checked and treated by visiting doctors. When they contracted a venereal disease,
they were given an injection known as "No. 606"-Salvarsan, a notorious antibiotic that
contained arsenic and also worked to prevent pregnancy.

According to testimony of both soldiers and victims, after the Japanese were defeated in World
War II, many of the women who had worked in the military brothels were either forced to commit
suicide or sealed in caves and left to die. Others were simply abandoned, left stranded
wherever they were, generally thousands of miles from their homes. Some women managed to get
back home despite the obstacles they encountered on the way. Once they had arrived home,
however, they were not welcomed by their families. Instead, they were stigmatized as "dirty
women" because of the work they had been forced into at the brothels. Abandoned by their own
families and scarred by the sexual and medical abuse they had suffered in the military
brothels, these women were largely unable to lead normal lives. For decades they lived on the
margins of society, ostracized, completely forgotten, erased from history, just barely
scratching out a survival existence.

It took more than fifty years to bring out the long-suppressed history of these women. In 1990
South Korean feminist scholars and activists succeeded in breaking the long silence of the
comfort women by founding the Korean Council for the Women Drafted into Military Sexual
Slavery by Japan. The council made the following demands of the Japanese government:

1. Acknowledgment of the Japanese government's crimes against the former military sex slaves
2. Disclosure of the complete details of those crimes
3. A formal apology for the crimes
4. Erection of a memorial for victims
5. Payment of reparations to the victims and their families 6. Inclusion of the history of military sexual slavery in Japanese school textbooks and educational curricula
7. Appropriate punishment of the criminals (Park 1997, 109)
the In 1991 Kim Haksun (1924-1997), a former comfort woman, was first to come forward to tell
her story in public. (see Box 8.3). Gradually other comfort women followed suit, and
eventually they filed a landmark lawsuit against Japan "for drafting them into service for the
sexual satiation of the Japanese soldiers during the Pacific War," although ultimately there
was no resolution to the case. In 1993, based on a two-year government investigation, Chief
Cabinet Secretary Kono Yohei made an official statement that women were indeed forced to work
in the brothels; however, the statement did not explicitly state that the Japanese military
was directly involved. Conservative Japanese politicians have continued to assert that comfort
women were merely paid prostitutes and the Japanese government was not legally responsible for
setting up comfort stations. Those politicians have vehemently rejected any demand for a
formal apology. Many Japanese political leaders, including prime ministers, have regularly
visited the Yasukuni Shrine, a shrine commemorating the war dead, including a number of high-
profile war criminals, which stirs further outrage among people in Asia and beyond.

In addition to the controversy over a formal apology and appropriate reparations, it is worth
mentioning that there were major differences between the postwar tribunals in Europe and those
held in Asia on the issue of reparations to the former comfort women. In 1948 the Batavia
Court charged thirteen Japanese soldiers with conscripting into sexual service Dutch women who
were living in Indonesia at that time. Three of those soldiers were ultimately executed. In
contrast, no charge has ever been brought to the Tokyo War Crimes Trials for the sexual
enslavement of Asian women (Choi 1997, vi). The issue of comfort women has remained a thorny
issue in Asia because of the Japanese government's persistent denial of involvement in the
trafficking of Asian women for the purpose of sexual slavery and its refusal to offer proper
reparations to the victims.

In a significant way, the military sexual slavery system during World War II was far from a
singular tragedy. It can be understood in a larger historical, political, and cultural
context. As anthropologist Sarah Soh argues, Korean comfort.women embody the issue of
"gendered structural violence" because "the wartime exploitation and lifelong suffering of
Korean survivors arose not only within the comfort women system and the broader parameters of
Japanese colonialism and fifteen years of war, but also within Korean patriarchy and its
political economy under colonial rule" (Soh 2008, xii-xii).

BOX 8.3

Testimony of a Former "Comfort Woman," Kim Haksun

In.1991 Kim Haksun was the first of the Korean comfort women to come forward in public to
share her story. The following is a brief description of the life of Kim Haksun. Parts of her
testimony were drawn from True Stories of the Korean Comfort Women (Howard 1995).

Kim Haksun was born in 1924, in Jilin, Manchuria. Unfortunately, her father died soon after
her birth. Unable to find means to support the family in Manchuria, Kim's mother decided to
move back to P'yŏngyang, where Kim grew up and attended a missionary school. Kim's mother
remarried when Kim was fourteen, and Kim was sent to a foster family that trained kisaeng
(entertainment girls). Although she graduated from the kisaeng academy after two years'
training, she was only seventeen years of age, too too young to be licensed to work in a
kisaeng house. In 1941, her foster father took her to Beijing in the hope that she would be
able to find work there.While they were in Beijing her foster father was taken away by
Japanese soldiers on allegations of "spying," and she was sent to a house used as a comfort
station near a Japanese military unit in Tiebizhen, China. On her first night there she was
raped twice by the Japanese officer who had arrested her foster father.

Kim recalls that women at the comfort station served seven or eight Japanese soldiers a day,
depending on the military activities that the soldiers had been assigned. The women were
forced to have intercourse with the soldiers even during their menstruation. Some soldiers
were extremely demanding and violent. A military doctor routinely visited the comfort station
once a

KOREA

Celebrating the 1,000th protest on December 14, 2011: This weekly protest began on January 8,
1992, and has continued on every Wednesday in front of the Japanese embassy in Seoul. The
protesters call for aformal apology and proper reparations to the victims of wartime sexual
slavery. At this 1000th protest, a statue of a "comfort woman" was unveiled. Several surviving
"comfort women" were present at this rally. week to give check-ups. When he detected something
wrong, he would inject the women with No. 606. Kim heard from a fellow comfort woman that
rankand-file soldiers paid 1.5 yen a visit and the officers 8 yen to stay the whole night;
however, she never received any money.

One day she and some other women were asked to pack quickly, and they were moved to a new,
more remote location. There she met a Korean peddler who managed to enter her room when the
Japanese soldiers were on an expedition. She begged him to take her with him, and he helped
her escape the comfort station. In 1942 they settled in Shanghai, managing a pawn shop. She
gave birth to her two children there. They came back to Korea in 1946 after Korea's liberation
from Japanese control, but tragedy ensued. Her daughter died during an outbreak of cholera,
and in 1953 her husband was killed in an accident. Kim describes how she felt after his death:
I had suffered so much, living with this man who had supposedly been my husband. When he was
drunk and aggressive, because he knew that I had been a comfort woman, he would insult me with
words that had cut me to the quick. After we had returned to Korea I didn't want

(continued)
him to come near me. My life seemed to be wretched. I had refused to do as I was told, and I
received more and more abuse from him. When he called me a dirty bitch or a prostitute in
front of my son, I cursed him. (Quoted in Howard 1995, 39)

Kim drifted from one place to another, eking out a meager living to support her son and
herself. Tragically, her son drowned while swimming when he was in elementary school. After
that, in despair over her daily hardships, she made repeated attempts to end her life. But she
had a chance encounter with a woman who had suffered through the aftermath of the atomic bombs
being dropped on Japan, someone with whom she shared a great deal of resentment against the
Japanese. That encounter inspired her to share her experience as a comfort woman with the
larger public. The following is the conclusion of her testimony: I find it very painful to
recall my memories. Why haven't I been able to lead a normal life, free from shame, like other
people? When I look at old women, I compare myself to them, thinking that I cannot be like
them. I want to find the people who took away my innocence and made me as I am and tear them
limb from limb. How will I ever appease my bitterness? I would like it if I didn't have to
disturb my memories any further. But once I am dead and gone, I wonder whether the Korean or
Japanese governments will give any attention to the miserable life ofa woman like me. (Quoted
in Howard 1995, 40)
