Japan

Feminism and Politics in the War Years

Following the Manchurian Incident in 1931 (see Chapter 5), Japanese feminists struggled with
the question of supporting their nation-a key element in the quest for women's rights-or
opposing the increasing repression at home and the expanding warfare on the Asian continent.
At first most of them opposed Japan's foreign policy and continued to work for women's rights
at home while recognizing that the struggle for voting rights was increasingly hopeless. By
the end of the 1930s feminists abandoned even these efforts. During the period the Japanese
call the Fifteen-Year War, from 1931 to 1945, almost all progressives and advocates of civil
rights either went to jail, abandoned their activist movements and lived quietly in the
countryside, or tried to find a way to live through the bad times by cooperating with the
government.

In the years immediately after the Manchurian Incident, feminists, speaking as "mothers of
humanity," outspokenly condemned the war (Ichikawa, quoted in Mackie 2002, 101). "Mothers of
humanity" was a maternalist description of women that women's suffrage advocate Ichikawa Fusae
had used in a November 1931 newspaper column blasting the Japanese incursion into Manchuria.
Feminists' opposition was to military expansionism in China, and not to Japanese colonialism
in Korea, which few opposed. By the end of the decade, feminists and others appeared to shift
their views on a variety of topics in addition to the war. For example, Ichikawa framed the
quest for civil rights as a way for women to "assist the Emperor" (Ichikawa 1935). Today,
historians note that the emperor system (tennōsei) was one of the roots of Japanese prewar
illiberalism and militarism (Ienaga 1978), although in the 1930s few Japanese would have
considered the idea of serving the emperor to be any different from the idea of serving the
country. Because prewar feminists tried to become part of a now discredited government system,
later feminist historians have critiqued them. When Japan's presence in China and Manchuria
became militarized, those Japanese feminists who had been involved in transnational movements
felt torn between nationalism and transnationalism. They were disheartened by the differences
between what they called the Japanese civilian government's "pacific assurances" about the
conflict in Manchuria following the Manchurian Incident of 1931, on one hand, and the
aggressive actions of the Japanese military, on the other. Japanese WCTU representatives who
traveled to the continent in the early 1930s were naively stunned by their Chinese
counterparts' anger at Japan's military actions (Ogawa 2007, 165). The U.S. branch of the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, previously allies of Japan's WCTU and
Women's Peace Association, lobbied the U.S. government to impose sanctions against Japan after
the Manchurian Incident. In 1934, Japan's WCTU and YWCA leaders lamented this turn of events
in Japanese Women Speak: A Message from the Christian Women of Japan to the Christian Women of
America, an English-language book published in Boston and targeted to a trans-Pacific American
audience: The writer wishes to emphasize the difficult position in which Jappanese Christians,
and especially Japanese women, who are promoters of international peace and harmony, have been
placed. To some [Japanese] nationalists, the term "internationalism" is synonymous with
"Communism," and they regard Christians as dangerous and disloyal; while the peace-workers and
pacifists of other countries brand them as cowards, kowtowing humbly before militarism. (Kawai
and Kubushiro 1934, 168)

What these Christian peace advocates in the WCTU and YWCA did not recognize was that their
statements of support for transnational friendship through Christianity did not go far enough.
In a letter from the Japanese Women's Peace Association to the Chinese Women's Suffrage League
in 1932, the Peace Association asked for forgiveness for the Japanese government's actions,
thereby placing the onus of unresolved differences on the Chinese victims (Kawai and Kubushiro
1934, 180-181). This failed to address the root causes of transnational tensions-the
imperialistic actions of the Japanese government-and, in fact, assumed a kind of "imperialist
privilege," which is ironic since Japanese Christian women resented being treated with "white
privilege"by Western women, who similarly did not recognize that form of privilege. Gauntlett
Tsune, a member of the Japanese WCTU and YWCA, president of Japan's Women's Peace Association,
and the international president of the Pan-Pacific Women's Association, also did not
anticipate the resistance she would encounter when the Chinese delegates to the 1937 meeting
of the Pan-Pacific Women's Association in Vancouver, British Columbia, initially refused to
attend because Gauntlett was presiding over that meeting.

Japanese Christian women tried to maintain transnational ties across the Pacific in the late
1930s but were increasingly unable to do so. In 1938, to counter negative images of Japan, the
WCTU began publishing an English-language journal, Japan Through Women, to highlight the
positive deeds of Japan's women. But this effort failed, and the Japanese WCTU severed its
ties to the World WCTU at the outset of the Pacific War in December 1941 (Ogawa 2007, 175).
The Japanese WCTU and other Christian groups then refocused their transnationalism toward
Asia, rather than toward the Anglo-American countries. To reach out to China, the Japanese
WCTU built schools and a medical settlement house called Airinkan (Hall of Neighborly Love) in
Beijing and undertook social reform projects, believing these acts of sisterhood would improve
Japan's image in China. But these projects were possible only because they were under the
umbrella created by Japanese military and colonial protection, and rather than improving
Japan's image, they tied the knot of imperialism more tightly (Ogawa 2007, 172).

Like their Christian sisters, with whom they often collaborated in social reform and suffrage
organizations, secular feminists also had long-existing links with feminists across the
Pacific that were strained by Japan's militarist actions. The secular feminists at first
opposed the war, then attempted to persuade their Asian, American, European, and Australian
friends that they represented good transnationalism; finally they made accommodations with
Japan's wartime government, pivoting away from the West and toward Asia. Ichikawa Fusae was
the secular feminist most often criticized after the war for having replaced her earlier
opposition to the state with the kind of wartime collaboration in government-sponsored
activities on the home front undertaken by most other secular and Christian feminists. These
feminists were almost all immediately reestablished as leaders in government or civil society
after the war, but Ichikawa, who later became one of the most highly respected members of the
Diet, was purged by the postwar U.S. military occupation (one of only eight women, out of a
total of two hundred thousand Japanese, who were purged). She did not deny, as did many of her
compatriots, that she had supported the war. Despite or, perhaps, because of this, the
occupation recast her in the immediate postwar years as the archetypal feminist nationalist
who "sold out" to gain a political voice during the war. The transnational feminist links of
both Christian and secular feminists were severely challenged by Japan's military aggression.
The Women's Suffrage League tried to maintain ties to Western friends by publishing Japanese
Women, an English-language newsletter whose goal was similar to that of the WCTU's Japan
Through Women, that is, to maintain transnational unity among women. The journal, edited by
Ichikawa, printed sixteen issues from 1938 through July 1940. In an introductory essay in the
first issue, Ichikawa noted that the goal of the publication was to maintain ties with
feminists overseas in time of war: "It is our earnest desire to have our co-workers abroad
recognize and be acquainted with the work, insignificant perhaps but nevertheless assiduous
effort, of the Japanese women" (Ichikawa 1938). The November 1938 issue contained an article
by the YWCA that recognized that both Japanese Women and Japan Through Women were explicitly
intended to “increase the understanding of foreign women in the problems and interests of
Japanese women" (YWCA National Committee 1938). It noted: "In China, although on one hand
great destruction is being wrought, on the other hand much sympathy is felt toward the
citizens of China, and Japanese women are very eager to participate in medical relief and
assistance for civilians and poor people." The writer used the passive voice in the first part
of this sentence, not mentioning that the Japanese military was responsible for that
destruction. The remaining issues of Japanese Women, especially the May 1940 issue, offer much
insight into the attempts by the Women's Suffrage League and other transnational feminists to
maintain their ties across the Pacific, which were increasingly slipping out of their hands.
At the samè time, Ichikawa and others wrote enthusiastically about their improving
relationships with Chinese women in territory recently pacified and placed under Japanese
control. As noted earlier, these ties were possible because of the reach of the Japanese
government and military. Japan's feminists appeared unaware of the privileges their
nationality conferred. Ichikawa and two other feminists traveled to Japanese-occupied central
China between February 22 and April 11, 1940, and Ichikawa reported on that trip in the May
issue of Japanese Women. She opened by commenting how deeply she was touched by the
devastation of the cities and countryside in that region, and noted that the suffering of war
always seemed to hit women and children most heavily. She compared the suffering of the
Chinese to that of people in Poland and Norway, countries 'devastated by the Germans; it is
hard to tell if she noticed the irony of the comparison. She wrote that it was a "matter of
deep regret that Japan and China found it impossible to solve our mutual problems by peaceful
means" (Ichikawa 1940a). Ichikawa went on to write that the new pro-Japan government in
Nanjing under Wang Jingwei seemed to be improving conditions for Chinese in that city, and she
enthusiastically described meetings with Chinese women leaders who supported Wang's pro-
Japanese puppet government. Meetings with other feminists understandably did not go so well,
she reported. In addition, she wrote, war between Japan and China might have been avoided if
women of the two countries had worked together more closely before the war.

It is clear that she was conflicted between her (vaguely suggested) opposition to Japanese
warfare in China, on one hand, and her pride in the improved ties with some Chinese women made
possible by that aggression, on the other.

In this article, Ichikawa described her leap from trans-Pacific transnationalism to East Asian
transnationalism: We have every reason to regret that educated women of Japan and China have
so far only concentrated themselves upon absorbing Occidental civilization and neglected
entirely to know each other, paying little attention to our racial affiliation which is
extremely close if not identical.. I myself have been to America twice, but to China but once,
and that very recently.

But her desire to maintain transnational ties to America was not yet completely eradicated. In
fact, she merged Sino-Japanese transnationalism with U.S.-Japan transnationalism. Her belief
in the importance and benefit of East Asian transnationalism under the Japanese flag caused
her to reach out emotionally for American support: I am really sorry for this war-torn world
of ours; there is hardly a spot on earth where some kind of trouble is not threatening. It is
indeed a most difficult question how we shall be able to bring about lasting peace out of this
chaotic world..I earnestly seek the moral support of the American women deeply concerned with
the peace of the world, to help us as best as you can to make our Sino-Japanese women's
cooperation a real success.

In the end, the nationalism of the war years would absorb and unravel the prewar era's
transnationalism.

By the middle of the 1930s, women's suffrage was also being challenged, and Japan's militarist
government kept suffragists under close surveillance (Molony 2004, 143). In several elections
in the early 1930s, the WSL campaigned for candidates they believed to be incorruptible,
calling this action an "election purification" movement. They considered this a way to be
involved in politics in a uniquely feminine way (they argued that women, who did not have the
vote, were inherently purer than men). But increasingly the WSL turned to less overtly
political activities as a way of involving disenfranchised women in governance. The first such
issue the WSL turned its attention to was garbage collection and disposal. Since 1932, the
residents of Tokyo's Fukagawa ward, where much of Tokyo's trash was dumped and incinerated,
had resisted the municipal government's push to increase the number of incinerators (Tamanoi
2009, 835). Rather than moving the incinerators to other areas of Tokyo, the government worked
with the WSL to persuade women throughout Tokyo to reduce the overall amount of trash they
generated and to separate it into waste that could be incinerated and waste that could not.
This was ultimately a political and civic activity, but it masqueraded as a housewives
concern, making it acceptable to Japan's conservative leaders. As two WSL leaders noted in
1934: "It is trash that moves Japan and us women. Although we women have no vote to cast, we
can exercise our political rights in local affairs" (Kaneko Shigeri, quoted in Tamanoi 2009).
Ichikawa noted that "because [the garbage problem] is related to women's sphere, we were able
to receive the support of the authorities and general public without any resistance" (Ichikawa
1934). The WSL also joined with consumer groups to bring greater competition to the wholesale
fish market, which was monopolized by a small group of merchants. The WSL embarked on what
they called "the politics of the kitchen" and formed a lobbying group to break up the
monopoly.

In February 1934 the women's activities achieved success when the Tokyo Municipal Council
voted to break up the wholesale monopoly (Ichikawa 1974, 323-325). The last of the feminists'
maternalist movements in the 1930s focused on getting the government to pass welfare
legislation for poor mothers and children. In 1934 twenty women's organizations lobbied
together for the Mother-Child Protection Law. This passed in 1937, giving financial assistance
to mothers who were destitute as a result of the loss of their children's fathers in war. The
WSL considered this law's passage a victory for women (Tomie 2005, 246). These welfare reforms
and women's "politics of the kitchen" activities laid the groundwork for women's greater
social and political involvement after the war (see Chapter 9).

The ideological trends in feminism can be seen in the changing resolutions that came out of
the annual National Women's Suffrage Conventions that were held throughout the 1930s. The
first convention took place in 1930, when feminists were optimistic about getting the vote
(see Chapter 5). At the third convention, in May 1932, the participants roundly condemned the
recent Manchurian Incident and the rise of "fascism" in Japan (Ichikawa 1932). At the fourth
convention, in February 1933, the conveners had hoped to pass a resolution calling for the
reduction of military spending, but they were unable to do so since the Social Democratic
Women's League, a proletarian suffragist group, had come to view continental expansion as a
way of helping the desperately poor in Japan, who were suffering during the Depression. The
fifth convention, held in 1934, supported resolutions for peace, for benefits to families of
soldiers killed in the war, for cooperation with women around the world, for birth control,
and for mother-child protection legislation. By the sixth convention, held in 1935, the
suffragists' views had shifted to calling on the government to give women the vote so they
might help the government in this time of "emergency" or "crisis" (terms used by the
government as euphemisms for war). The conventions were supplanted in 1938 by the Women's
National Emergency Congress (also called the Women's Conference on Current Problems) when the
rise of militarism at home made suffrage conferences suspect (Nishikawa 1997, 53). That marked
the end of conventions focused on women's civil rights until after World War I.

By far the largest women's organizations during the long prewar and war period were those run
by the government. In 1931 the Ministry of Education created the Greater Japan Federated
Women's Association (Dai Nippon Rengo Fujinkai). In 1932 the army took over an originally
independent patriotic women's group called the National Defense Women's Association (Kokubō
Fujinkai), and the Home Ministry took over an older nationalist group called the Patriotic
Women's Association (Aikoku Fujinkai). The independent women's organizations discussed
earlier, both Christian and secular, initially resented these government-affiliated
organizations: they were run by men, they took potential members away from the groups
dedicated to women's rights, and they dealt with women from the perspective of mobilizing them
to serve the state through stereotyped women's roles. When the autonomous groups were forced
to disband around 1940, most members of those groups came to accept the government
organizations as venues for women's agency outside the home, as well as suitable means for
serving the nation. The membership of these organizations, taken together, reached nineteen
million by the end of the decade. These women saw soldiers off to war, packed kits for them,
and were expected to act as "good wives and wise mothers" to serve the state.

Full-scale warfare between China and Japan broke out in July 1937, and the government
increased efforts to mobilize society spiritually, materially, and militarily. In response,
the WSL and seven other nongovernmental women's groups, such as the YWCA and the WCTU, joined
together in a Federation of Japanese Women's Organizations (Nihon Fujin Dantai Renmei). It was
this federation that, together with a dozen other Japanese women's organizations, held the
Women's National Emergency Congress that replaced the National Women's Suffrage Convention in
1938. The congress promoted the idea that working with the state was a way for women to
empower one another and to serve other women and children on the home front.

In December 1939 the Federation of Japanese Women's Organizations joined with the government-
affiliated patriotic women's associations in a huge meeting in Tokyo, during which they called
on the government to allow women to serve the state by aiding the economy (Women's Conference
1940). The WSL believed-naively, as it turned out-that this collaboration would persuade the
nineteen million members of the government-led organizations to adopt a pro-suffrage position,
and that the government could be persuaded to "hand over to women themselves" the leadership
of the huge national organizations (Ichikawa 1940b, 4). In addition, Ichikawa wrote, by doing
essential work on behalf of the nation, Japanese women would gain rights, just as Western
women had after World War I: "We sincerely hope that the day may soon come when we too may be
more fully equipped to work not only for the welfare of the nation but for the world and the
humanity at large to which one half of the human race belongs" (Ichikawa 1938, 1-2).

In February 1942, the government amalgamated all Japanese women's organizations into one large
group, the Greater Japan Women's Association (Dai Nippon Fujinkai), which included the
government-directed groups as well as the more progressive feminist, Christian, and social
reform groups that had not yet been disbanded. Disappointing many feminists, the leadership of
this association continued to be male. Trade unions were terminated and laborers were brought
under the Patriotic Industry Association, so union and socialist women's groups ceased to
exist as well. Many leaders of formerly autonomous women's groups were placed on national
boards. Ichikawa herself was placed on the board of the Patriotic Press Association, which
monitored the press; it was her membership on this press board that caused her to be purged by
the postwar U.S. occupation (Molony 2005, 60). There were no autonomous women's organizations
left in Japan after 1942, and if women wished to have a voice or improve conditions on the
home front during the war, they were forced to join the government. As it turned out, women
were outnumbered by men and ignored on virtually all the boards on which they served (Ichikawa
1942). Many women's rights activists accepted the wartime government's invitation to join
national organizations because they hoped to show that women deserved a role in the state
(Garon 1993, 7-8). In the first decades after World War II,historians and many others
considered women's wartime cooperation with the state to have been unavoidable in the context
of the times. In addition, they applauded feminists' involvement in national organizations as
the first steps toward equality. However, after the widespread exposure of the "comfort women"
issue (to be discussed in detail later in this chapter), this attitude gave way to a major
reassessment in the 1980s of prewar feminists and their quest for inclusion in a state that
had carried out heinous anti-woman atrocities.

Gender, Diaspora, and Empire

Japanese men and women were geographically mobile in the decades after the 1880s, when the
Japanese government lifted the restrictions on emigration (see Chapter 4). Although the
largest number of migrants intended their stay to be temporary, the overseas stays often
became permanent, whether across the Pacific or, more commonly, in Northeast Asia. Potential
migrants viewed Taiwan (a colony of Japan since 1895), Korea (a colony since 1910), and
Manchuria (a puppet state since 1932) as parts of Japan. But in those territories, gender
played a role that was different from that in the Japanese homeland and different from that in
Western colonies as well.

Most significant was that Japanese women outnumbered Japanese men in Korea in the first years
of colonial possession. This was opposite to the pattern of European and American imperialism,
where men vastly outnumbered women in the initial years of those countries' colonies. The
largest number of colonial Japanese women were in the sex trades. Japanese-owned newspapers in
Korea praised Japanese sex workers for bringing civilization to some of their rough customers,
especially Russians in Northeast Asia. Other Japanese women sought work in Korea and Manchuria
as professionals, since opportunities to work as journalists, shopkeepers, colonial
administrators, and even schoolteachers were more limited in the home country. Middle-class
Japanese women also sought occupations in colonial Taiwan (Sokolsky 2014). This pattern was
similar to that of European women, who also looked for opportunities in the colonies, often in
the professions or in religious proselytizing, that were less available to them at home. In
terms of sexuality, Japanese men and women in the colonies behaved differently than each other
and differently than European men and women in their colonies. Japanese women were more likely
to marry Korean men, but Japanese men greatly preferred wives or mistresses who were Japanese;
European colonial men often had affairs with local women, while European women were largely
either unmarried or married to European men (Brooks 2005). Korean men who migrated to Japan to
work in the interwar period far outnumbered Korean women in Japan. Virtually all the Korean
women in Japan were married to Korean men, while a number of Korean men married Japanese women
(Smith 2005). By the 1930s, as Japan was intensifying the development of its possessions in
both Northeast Asia and Taiwan, the percentage of diasporic Japanese men jumped rapidly ahead
of the percentage of women. Entrepreneurs set up massive production facilities, mining
operations, and hydroelectric plants, which for the most part employed both Japanese and local
men rather than women. There were more than half a million Japanese of both genders in Korea
by 1930 and more than two hundred thousand in Manchuria. Hundreds of thousands more were
Japanese military men in Korea and Manchuria. Many Japanese also migrated to the islands the
League of Nations had given Japan as protectorates after World War I; in 1935, for example,
fifty thousand Japanese lived on tiny Saipan. In addition, large numbers of Japanese migrated
to cities throughout non-Japanese-controlled East Asia, including twenty-six thousand in
Shanghai, where they played a large role in banking and textiles. Each of those cities had its
own Japanese women's groups, newspapers, and medical clinics. These kinds of ethnic
communities developed in North and South America as well, where the Japanese, like all other
immigrant groups, published their own newspapers and had their own community organizations,
Buddhist temples, and Christian churches.

The war years were a terrible time for most Japanese migrants. And yet evenen during the 1940s
some Japanese women and men continued to live adventurous lives in East Asia. For example,
Hayashi Fumiko and Yoshiya Nobuko, two highly popular writers (see Chapter 6), were part of
the first "Pen Squadron," male and female writers sent by the Ministry of Information to the
front lines in China to report on the war and to give encouragement to Japanese soldiers.
Hayashi wrote on assignment for major Japanese newspapers; she was the first Japanese woman to
enter Nanjing after it fell to Japanese forces, and the first Japanese civilian to enter
Hankou. In 1940 and 1941, she lectured throughout the Japanese empire, from Japan to Korea,
Manchuria, and occupied China (Horiguchi 2009, 67). As the existence of the Pen Squadron
indicates, the extent of the Japanese empire was measured not only by its male soldiers'
wartime conquests but also by the reach of some civilian women.

Calling Manzhouguo a "new paradise," the Japanese military tried to entice five million young
farmers to settle there to release the pressure of overpopulation at home and to establish a
strong ethnically Japanese population base. Village leaders in Japan were recruited to sell
this community emigration program, but few people initially took the bait. In 1938 the

BOX 8.1

8/ GENDER AND WORLD WAR II

Japanese Americans in Internment Camps

in the United States In North America, 110,000 native-born American citizens of Japanese
ancestry and Japanese immigrants-who were not eligible for citizenship because of racist anti-
Asian laws-who resided in the western region of the United States were placed in concentration
camps (also called internment camps) under Executive Order 9066 of February 19, 1942. Many
remained there until 1946, losing their homes, livelihoods, and property. Young men could get
out of the camps by joining segregated units in the U.S. military, but the opportunity to
serve in the military did not exist for young women. Both young women and men, if they were
fortunate, could get out by attending universities, most of them east of the Mississippi, and
most of them religious schools that did not harbor the anti-Japanese attitudes more common in
the western region. Japanese American students began to attend these colleges and universities
in 1942 and 1943, and women made up about 40 percent of one group of a thousand students able
to leave the camps in this way. Others were approved to leave to take up jobs that needed to
be filled during the war. Three hundred women found positions in nursing. Others undertook
office work, factory and agricultural work, and domestic service. By 1945, 37 percent of men
over the age of sixteen and 63 percent of women over sixteen had left the camps. Most who were
able to do so were young; older family members had few such chances to be released. This
changed family dynamics radically, as women who left the camps were forced to develop greater
self-reliance, living among non-Japanese Americans who might not readily accept them; in
addition, their income contributed to their families (Matsumoto 1984, 11-13). Similar camps
were set up by the Canadian government, which incarcerated twenty-two thousand people. And the
United States rounded up 2,264 Japanese immigrants in Peru and shipped them to American
concentration camps. colonial authorities began recruiting boys from thirteen to sixteen years
of age to be part of Youth Brigades stationed in Manzhouguo. The boys soon became depressed
and homesick, so a year later the colonial authorities began recruiting girls they called
"continental brides" to join the boys. The Youth Brigades members and their young brides
eventually made up oneJapan 329 third of the total of 380,000 Japanese farmers in Manzhouguo.
The Japanese military later conscripted the adult male migrants and Youth Brigade boys,
leaving the women and children behind to continue farming. In August 1945 the Soviets invaded
Manzhouguo. Members of the Japanese military used all available transportation for their own
escape, abandoning the women and children to rape, slaughter, and starvation at the hands of
the Russians. More than half a million Japanese subjects, including hundreds of thousands of
Koreans, were hauled off to Siberia, and at least three hundred thousand were never heard from
again. Some thirty thousand Japanese children survived because their Japanese mothers were
able to leave them with kindly Chinese neighbors. Raised as Chinese, many of these children
tried to find their Japanese families after diplomatic relations between China and Japan
resumed in the 1970s (Lipman, Molony, and Robinson 2012, 314-315).

Other overseas Japanese suffered greatly at the end of the war. While soldiers and sailors
were the archetypes of Japanese masculinity, women were eventually used as symbols of
unflappable resistance to the powerful AngloAmerican military. As historian Haruko Cook notes,
this symbolism was created by journalists, and it helped to prolong the war (H. Cook, 2005).
An American journalist's incorrect report that thousands of women were jumping to their deaths
rather than surrender to American forces on Saipan was picked up by the Japanese press and
published in Japan as well. (As Cook notes, most civilians actually did surrender.) For
American readers, this report was an indication that the Japanese were fanatical and would
never surrender. The report had a similar effect on Japanese readers, encouraging the men to
keep struggling even as civilian women bravely went to their deaths. But the gendered
dichotomy that had long "positioned men exclusively as warriors on the battlefield and women
as mere supporters and providers of comfort on the home front" (Frühstück 2014, 163) was
itself modified by the end of the war. Nurses worked on the battlefield and high school girls
were trained in firing guns, and in June 1945 the Volunteer Military Service Laws were passed:
women between seventeen and forty were to be conscripted into the National Volunteer Combat
Corps, and the Greater Japan Women's Association was dissolved and its members reorganized
into the Combat Corps (Frühstück 2014, 172). Two months later, the war was over.

Women were not, however, inducted into the army as soldiers before the end of the war. The
combatant experience belonged entirely to men. For many young men of the war era, "the soldier
embodied Japan and what it meant to be a Japanese man" (T. Cook 2005, 259). As we saw in
Chapter 4, this was a constructed type of masculinity, as there had been no army tradition for
commoners in Japan until the end of the nineteenth century. In many ways, Japanese soldiers
resembled those of other industrialized, countries; even the brutal atrocities that are still
used to define the Japanese military man have parallels in every war and in every country. The
most notorious, the Nanjing Massacre, lasted for six weeks after Japanese troops entered the
Chinese city of Nanjing on December 13, 1937. During this time, around two hundred thousand
people were killed, of whom only about twenty thousand were men of military age (the actual
numbers will never be known, but most historians believe these are reasonable estimates). Tens
of thousands of women were raped, and an additional sixty thousand refugees outside the city
limits were killed or starved to death. The scale of this atrocity is enormous, but the events
themselves and the reasons for them are not unique. The historical explanations for these
events, as for similar atrocities around the world, include the soldiers' reactions to the
loss of their comrades, harsh hierarchical treatment within the Japanese military, a mob
mentality, and the dehumanizing of the enemy.

One additional explanation for the soldiers' actions, which was particularly important to
Japanese military leaders at that time, was related to their view of masculine sexuality: the
atrocities were blamed on a medical notion of uncontrollable male sexuality. This view-that
war atrocities are caused by men who cannot control their sexuality-was not common in military
thinking elsewhere, nor in Japan today. To control the incidence of rape in areas under
Japanese military occupation, they reasoned, the army should set up a system of "comfort
stations." Battlefield sex stations had been deployed earlier, but the systematic building of
stations to follow the advancing army occurred after the Nanjing Massacre. The workers in
these stations were young women who were either enticed with promises of factory work and then
turned into sex slaves or simply kidnapped. At the time, the term used for these women was
ianfu (comfort women), but in reality they were military sexual slaves. Korean, Chinese,
Japanese, Vietnamese, Dutch, Filipina, and other women made up this army of sex slaves.
Historians dispute the total numbers, but most estimate that there were between 150,00o and
200,000, of whom 80 to 90 percent were Korean women and girls. The experiences of women in
this gendered atrocity are discussed later in this chapter.

The Home Front in Japan and the End of the War

In 1940 the prime minister, Konoe Fumimaro, placed all civic organizations, such as labor
unions, political parties, and women's groups, under the rule of mass state organizations. One
of these was the Imperial Rule Assistance Association (IRAA), which was intended to coordinate
many aspects of daily life. In the end, however, it really had just one important role: the
distribution of rationed rice and other commodities. Every population center was organized
into neighborhood associations under the IRAA, and because most men were away at war, women
came to play a leadership role in these associations, arranging for distribution of rice to
all members of the community. These leadership functions helped train women for political
roles after the war, when women gained full civil rights. The National General Mobilization
Law, passed in 1938, was intended to control business, labor, and many other parts of the
wartime economy. In 1941 a labor draft was set up under this law, requiring all men ages
sixteen to forty who were not in the military and all unmarried women ages sixteen to twenty-
five to register for the labor draft. Men and women were treated differently because the
ideology of "good wife, wise mother" made it difficult to draft women with responsibilities to
their husbands and children (Miyake 1991). By the end of the war, one million adult men and
one million adult women had been drafted into war production, and three million children had
been pulled from school to work in munitions factories. Additionally, two million Koreans and
Chinese were taken from their homelands to work in Japan's mines and munitions plants.
"Extravagance," the Japanese state told its subjects from 1938 till 1945, "is the enemy!”
(Havens 1978, 10). But what was extravagance? By the end of the war, the average person in
Japan was allowed only a starvation-level ration of under 1,00o calories per day (Earhart
2008, 127). Extravagance meant something else-that is, consuming frivolously during difficult
times. Here clothing played a role. Because gender was an important part of defining the
nation, the control of extravagant clothing was also gendered. But in Japan, unlike other
nations at war, just making simpler clothes and using cheaper fabrics would not do. In
previous decades, Western-style clothing had been increasingly seen as more "functional"-that
is, more practical, cooler in summer, and cheaper. Working women (for example, nurses,
teachers, and bus conductors) had worn Western clothing before the war (Ajima 2011, Gordon
2011). But if Japan was fighting a war against Western powers, how could clothing be designed
both to save resources and to maintain nationalistic spirits? The army began to discuss
appropriate civilian national clothing as early as 1930. Men's military uniforms, adopted from
Western styles more than sixty years earlier, were the original "functional" clothing. Several
branches of the government organized committees to design and promote national dress, first
for men and later for women. Wearing national dress was encouraged During World War II, the
Japanese government urged women to wear "standard dress"-the simplified dresses on the right-
or moonpe trousers. This encouraged frugality and allowed women to work more efficiently.

but never required under Japanese law. In 1937 the government announced a plan to develop a
kokuminfuku-a national uniform or literally "citizen's dress"-for men. When the government
eventually got around to convening an advisory board to design clothing for women, in March
1941, there was to be no national uniform for ladies. Instead, the women's designs called for
hyŏjun fuku, or "standard dress." Only men were considered kokumin—citizens. Some of the
guidelines for the standard dress were the same as for the men's uniform-it had to be
economical and easy to move in. But getting women to wear the clothing was difficult. The
Greater Japan Women's Association took it as their task to persuade women to wear these simple
clothes. The cover of Nippon Fujin, the association's magazine, showed a gentle housewife in a
standard dress. But monpe, the baggy pants worn by women farmers, became the real uniform of
Japanese women during the war. Monpe were one of the styles approved as standard dress by the
government, although it was clear that the government really preferred functional dresses or
very simplified kimonos for women. Women made monpe out of worn-out dresses and kimonos. No
one required women to wear monpe, but poverty and shortages drove women into monpe, perhaps
even more than practicality and a patriotic desire to avoid extravagance. The war ended with
Japan's surrender on August 15, 1945. Almost 3 million Japanese had died, of whom 1.7 million
were military men. The rest were civilians who died from starvation (the raw materials used
for fertilizer production had been turned over to munitions production, so there was very
little food in Japan at the end of the war) or in air raids, most of them firebombings. Two
atomic bombs were dropped, on August 6 (Hiroshima)

and August 9 (Nagasaki). Nine million people were left homeless. The old Japan came to an end,
and as we shall see in Chapter 9, gender relations were one of the areas that changed
radically after the war.
