China

The Second World War, followed immediately by civil war between the Nationalists and
Communists in China, engulfed the country in the kind of total warfare that it had not
experienced since the Taiping wars of the midnineteenth century. It is estimated that some
twenty million Chinese died during the period of total war between 1937 and 1945, with even
greater numbers wounded or left homeless. Women were especially vulnerable to the ravages of
war. Millions were killed, raped, kidnapped, or forced into prostitution. The war disrupted or
destroyed family and social order, and in the process undermined existing gender norms, making
a full return to prewar life impossible. Women were forced into new roles and out of old
dependencies and habits. Although Japan occupied Manchuria in 1931, fighting between China and
Japan began in the north with the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, which inaugurated the invasion
of North China from Manchuria in 1937. After quickly capturing Beijing and Tianjin, Japanese
forces moved swiftly along rail lines to capture northern towns and cities. To slow the
Japanese advance, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, leader of Nationalist China, ordered the
breaking of Yellow River dikes, which caused massive flooding that drowned at least three
hundred thousand people and left more than two million homeless. The Communist Red Army built
up guerrilla bases across the north from which they launched attacks on the Japanese, aiming
to force them to retreat to the cities, leaving the countryside under the control of the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). This strategy was so effective that the Japanese responded with
a campaign of "kill all, loot all, burn all," which for three years unleashed indiscriminate
violence on civilians. The Chinese war effort was hampered by ongoing conflict between the
Nationalists (KMT)

and the Communists. Chiang Kai-shek considered the Communists to pose a greater long-term
threat to China than the Japanese, so his forces maintained an economic and military blockade
of CCP-held areas and launched military assaults on them.

The worst of the fighting took place in the Yangzi River valley. In 1937 the Japanese defeated
Nationalist forces in Shanghai after a bloody three-month battle, with horrific killing of
civilians and the loss of nearly two-thirds of the Nationalist forces. In December of that
year Japanese troops-frustrated with the unexpected strength of Chinese resistance, and primed
to see the Chinese as uncivilized and racially inferior-captured the Nationalist capital,
Nanjing, and carried out one of the worst atrocities of the war, the Nanjing Massacre, during
which they killed between 200,000 and 300,000 Chinese, most of them civilians. Nationalist
troops and the core of the government fled up the Yangzi Valley, first to Wuhan. Under siege
and heavily bombed, Wuhan fell to the Japanese by the end of 1938, and the Nationalist capital
of Free China moved to Chongqing, up the Yangzi River in Sichuan. Millions of refugees fled
Japanese-occupied areas, pouring into the southwest provinces of Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, and
Guangxi. Millions more people remained in the occupied areas, where the Japanese set up puppet
regimes governed by Chinese collaborators in Beijing and Nanjing (as they had in Manchuria
after 1931).

By the end of that year, after the Japanese occupied all of the major cities in northern,
central, and coastal China, the fighting reached a stalemate. The Japanese bombed the cities
of the Nationalist-controlled regions continuously, launching 268 bombing raids on Chongqing
alone. Throughout the war, the Japanese systematically used atrocities-including biological
warfare, poison gas, medical experimentation, and brutal occupation policies against
civilians-as a military tactic. In 1940 they started epidemics of bubonic plague in three
cities in Zhejiang province with airdrops of infected materials. In Manchuria they conducted
bacteriological warfare research on Chinese civilians at a facility named Unit 731. Many areas
of China's heartland were utterly destroyed and depopulated during the war.

Sexual Assault and Comfort Women

The horrific violence of this total war was acutely gendered, as Timothy Brook explains: Men
offighting age were shot or conscripted for labor because they were, or stood in for, the
soldiers of the nation. Women of childbearing age were raped or forced into prostitution
because they were, or stood for, the body of the nation. So rape was widely performed as a
gesture of conquest, but not simply as a release for male sexual starvation; it was an act of
humiliation. Japanese soldiers performed this act on the bodies of Chinese women, but the
target of the humiliation was Chinese men: it was proof of their impotence in all ways. (Brook
2005, 23-24)

As in Korea, the Japanese instituted a system of military sexual slavery as a tool of
conquest. In the midst of its initial assault on Shanghai in 1932, the Japanese military
established its first official "comfort station," based on the government's system of licensed
brothels that had been in operation since 1907. During the Nanjing Massacre, countless women,
including young girls and old women, were raped by Japanese soldiers, who killed many of them
and mutilated their bodies. Victims or family members who resisted rape were killed.
Westerners who witnessed the massacre and mass rape at Nanjing along with the Chinese
expressed outrage at this extreme sexual violence. Concerned about troop control and social
order in occupied zones, Japanese commanders accelerated expansion of the comfort station
system as the occupation proceeded, shipping in more women, mostly from colonized Korea, but
also from Taiwan and Japan.

Between 1932 and 1945 Japanese troops or local Chinese collaborators abducted and detained as
sexual slaves many tens of thousands of women, who were kept in more than a thousand comfort
stations set up all over occupied China. (An untold number beyond this were raped by soldiers
but not detained.) The comfort stations included both officially authorized and regulated
stations, run by the military or civilian proprietors, and makeshift stations set up by local
military units in their barracks or in a nearby building-or even in the homes of the women
themselves. Considered enemies of Japan, Chinese comfort women were subjected to sexual
brutality, beaten, bayoneted, or killed outright. Like Korean comfort women, many were
injected with toxic Salvarsan to prevent syphilis, but most contracted venereal diseases
anyway. Women who became pregnant were routinely killed. Also like their Korean counterparts,
many Chinese young women and girls were deceived with false offers of jobs as domestic
servants, nurses, and laundry women, then forced into sexual slavery by the military. But most
were abducted when Japanese troops invaded and occupied their communities, often after the
women witnessed the killing of their family members. In some areas, Chinese collaborators
actively participated in running comfort stations, while in others Chinese civilians working
in local administration under Japanese supervision ran them and were required, often under
threat of death, to recruit or force young women to work in them. Captured female resistance
fighters were also used as comfort women. After the war, as was the case in Korea, many
survivors lived in deep poverty, suffering from chronic physical and psychological problems
ranging from post-traumatic stress disorder to injuries to the uterine tract. Many were unable
to bear children, exacerbating their poverty and social isolation. Chinese survivors were
often vilified as women lacking in virtue who had collaborated with the enemy. Many were
targeted for persecution during the numerous political campaigns of the Mao era, 1949 to 1976
(see Chapters 9 and 10), and sentenced to hard labor or imprisonment as counterrevolutionary
traitors. Many committed suicide (Qiu 2014, 7-12).

Women and the War of Resistance

During the war, official discourse about women's place in society took a conservative turn in
areas under Japanese rule, the collaborationist regimes in Manchukuo (Manchuria) and Central
China, and regions under Nationalist government control. While state rhetoric emphasized the
importancee of traditional virtues of female self-sacrifice for family and society, it also
sanctioned a public role for women that extended their domestic nurturing duties into work in
nursing, education, and relief efforts. In occupied China, many women became active in
religiously inspired redemptive societies such as the Morality Society (Daodehui),which ran
schools, clinics, and lecture halls to promote moral reform and syncretic ideas of spiritual
salvation. Large numbers of women joined the World Women's Red Swastika Society, modeled on
the Western Red Cross Society, founded in 1932 to manage schools, carry out relief work, and
even conduct research on women's issues. (The swastika was an ancient Buddhist symbol, and its
use was not at all related to German Nazism.) Founded before the war, these popular societies
with their apolitical and socially conservative message flourished under wartime conditions of
censorship and political repression. Although politically tainted because of their
accommodation or outright collaboration with the Japanese, they were important vehicles for
encouraging women's activity outside the home (Duara 2004). Women were also active
participants in, and leaders of, resistance efforts in occupied and unoccupied China. In
Communist and Nationalist-controlled regions, authorities promoted a militarized lifestyle
emphasizing asceticism and self-sacrifice for the nation. Female and male students underwent
military training in their schools, and tens of thousands of young women and men volunteered
as health and social workers to assist with refugees or joined drama troupes to promote the
war effort. Women raised money and in-kind donations for the war effort, nursed wounded
veterans and provided support for their families, and engaged in relief work, child care, and
education. Women even fought as irregular soldiers in many areas (Li 2010).

Nationalist Party propaganda during the war held up as national heroines New Women who worked
to save the nation. Chiang Kai-shek's wife, Song Meiling (1897-2003), a graduate of Wellesley
College in Massachusetts and a Christian, was the chief model of patriotic womanhood for Free
China. She directed the Nationalist Party's New Life Movement, which was launched in 1934 to
promote a syncretic blend of Confucian and Christian values of female duty, family hierarchy,
and obedience to state authority as the moral foundation of a nation challenged by growing
leftist critiques of the regime and by the Japanese threat. As the war intensified, she led
projects to establish schools for war orphans, train women for wartime jobs, and provide
refugee relief. Charismatic, elegant, and fluent in English, she also played a major role in
Nationalist government diplomacy during the war, addressing the U.S. Congress in 1943 to
appeal for financial aid in the war effort and authoring numerous articles on the war
situation in China for the American public.

In the midst of the assault on Nanjing, a handfulof Westerners in the city established a safe
zone for refugees that encompassed the American embassy and several missionary schools as well
as Nanjing University, and they negotiated with the Japanese to recognize it as a neutral
area. Jinling Women's College, founded by missionaries, was designated specifically as a
refugee camp for women and children, sheltering and providing medical assistance to more than
ten thousand people. The efforts there were led by its acting president, American missionary
Minnie Vautrin (1886-1941), and Tsen Shui-fang (1875-1969), the college nurse and director of
its dormitories. The diaries kept by these two women, both of whom had refused to evacuate,
provide poignant accounts of the atrocities committed by Japanese troops and of heroic efforts
to protect civilians. These two women were in charge of the refugee camp and often personally
guarded the front gate against incursions, although troops frequently invaded the campus and
killed or kidnapped residents. When the safety zone ceased to exist under Japanese pressure in
1938, the school focused on refugee relief efforts (Hu and Zhang 2010, 5-13). Another national
heroine was Shi Liang (1900-1985), an activist lawyer from a literati family and one of the
first Chinese women to graduate from law school. In the early years of the war, she led the
countrywide effort to establish women's branches of the National Salvation Association (which
promoted military resistance to Japanese encroachment), an activity for which she was arrested
in 1936, when Chiang Kai-shek was still opposed to resisting Japan. After her release from
prison in 1937, she threw herself into the war effort, moving to Wuhan to organize women there
through the National Salvation Association. In 1938, during the ten months when Wuhan served
as the wartime capital after the fall of Nanjing, major relief efforts were launched from the
city. Shi Liang maintained close relationships with the most powerful women in the country,
including the Song sisters: Song Meiling (wife of Chiang Kai-shek), Song Qingling (widow of
Sun Yat-sen), and Song Ailing (wife of H. H. Kong, a banker who was the wealthiest man in
China).

In 1938, as the refugee crisis worsened, Shi Liang lobbied through this network of powerful
women to get the issue of refugee relief on the government's agenda, forming a political
coalition that included not only KMT women but also Communists such as Long March veteran Deng
Yingchao (whose husband, future premier Zhou Enlai, was in charge of the CCP's operations in
Nationalist-controlled regions). Her efforts resulted in the creation of the woman-run
National Relief Committee and the Wartime Child Welfare Committee, which became a model for
later child welfare organizations in the People's Republic of China and Taiwan. As the war
dragged on, more than forty child care centers run by women were set up by the Nationalist
Party in the southwest, providing care and education for hundreds of thousands of children.
Song Meiling visited many of these and gave speeches to support the effort. In 1938 Shi Liang
also organized a national women's committee to mobilize women for the war effort through
public rallies. She would later serve as the first minister of justice in the People's
Republic of China, from 1949 to 1959 (MacKinnon 2008, 55-59).

After the fall of Wuhan, more than six hundred private industries and some fifty schools and
colleges moved their entire operations to the southwest. Many teachers and students from
universities and schools in occupied areas, including many girls' middle schools and colleges,
migrated inland together to Nationalist-controlled areas. The Southwest Associated University
in Kunming, Yunnan, was the wartime union of Beijing, Qinghua, and Nankai Universities. It
sheltered many of the country's most respected academics and students. Middle schools formed
similar associations. Many single women moved west with their schools and workplaces as those
relocated away from the front lines. A number of these schools later became hotbeds of
political opposition to the Nationalist regime as repression of dissent against the
Nationalists deepened during the war.

Transformations of Family Life

In occupied China, the status of women deteriorated. Epidemics of malaria and other diseases
were common amid the wartime chaos. Women, children, and the elderly were particularly
vulnerable to disease, starvation, and exposure. At least a hundred million people fled to the
interior of the country to escape the violence and chaos of the occupied areas. Women made up
at least half of the total number of refugees. Many would never return to their homes. For
married women who fled with their husbands, this often meant permanent separation from their
natal families.

Family life was utterly transformed by the war, though the changes varied by region. In
occupied areas, the threat of mass rape and kidnapping caused many families to increase the
sequestering of women at home. Yet many women were forced to leave home as refugees or to find
work. All over China, war tore families apart, forced women into prostitution, and led to the
abandonment of children and the elderly as able-bodied women and men left to fight or find
work. As in most war-torn countries, the number of unmarried women and widows rose
significantly. In many occupied areas, women outnumbered men, reversing China's long-standing
deficit of women. Many women were left to support their families on their own when their
husbands, fathers, and sons went off to fight or were killed by the Japanese. Soldiers'
contact with and remittances of pay to their families were Chinese women receive basic
training in guerilla warfare about 1939.

rare. Many women had no idea whether their menfolk were still alive, and there was little if
any support for war widows.

Wartime economic collapse, marked by hyperinflation and depression, posed a different kind of
threat to family patriarchy, as even husbands who were at home were unable to support their
families financially. Legal case records from Beijing, for example, document widespread
marital conflict over such economic failure, with many women deserting destitute husbands or
suing to divorce them. A vastly expanded modern transportation system of roads and railroads
facilitated the quest for autonomy of a growing number of runaway wives, while also fueling
expansion of the traffic in women and children. Growing numbers of migrants to cities such as
Beijing clustered in crowded tenement neighborhoods, where women developed community support
networks and pursued nonmarital sexual relationships that in many ways substituted for tenuous
or collapsed family structures (Ma 2015).

War Work

In both occupied and unoccupied China, as in Japan and Korea, war increased both the
opportunity for paid work and the necessity for women to join the workforce. Industries that
relocated to the interior increased the demand for female factory workers while men were
occupied as soldiers. Many rural girls in the southwest who had never left their villages
moved to cities such as Chongqing to work. Educated women took up new kinds of jobs in relief
and refugee work, journalism, and government. Refugee women and children were hired to do work
such as sewing or making straw sandals for soldiers. Nationalist government publications
promoted the image of the career woman working to support the war effort. For many young,
single women, the chaos, displacement, and weakening of family authority caused by the war
created unprecedented freedom to choose careers and marriage partners. In the wartime capital
of Chongqing, by 1945 nearly 75 percent of the city's women were employed outside the home in
industry, commerce, or the service sector. More than thirteen thousand women labored in cotton
mills that had been relocated, along with other factories, from the coastal regions occupied
by the Japanese. These included some of the Chinese-owned mills that had employed most women
workers in Shanghai before the war. Though familiar in large coastal cities, the participation
of women in factory work was new to many regions and even at the height of the war was the
subject of much controversy. In response to calls for women to stay home and focus on their
duties as "worthy wives and good mothers" the government banned discrimination against women
in public service and affirmed the patriotism of women workers, promoting the slogan "Big
Brother goes to the battleground, Big Sister joins the factory; Big Brother kills the enemy at
the front, Big Sister works hard producing at the Rear; the Front and Rear are united, driving
off the foreign devils to enjoy the peace" (quoted in Howard 2013, 1903). The Women's Advisory
Committee of the General Association for the Advancement of the New Life Movement, an
organization in which both Nationalist and Communist women participated under the terms of the
Second United Front during the war, ran education campaigns among women factory workers, most
of whom were young and recently arrived from the surrounding countryside. Female instructors
taught literacy and the values of the New Life Movement: diligence, patriotism, and respect
for authority. However, Communist organizers working under the committee's auspices also
mentored workers, often through networks of sworn sisterhoods, on how to present their
grievances about harsh working conditions and inequalities in treatment of workers and the
mostly male technical and administrative staff. Empowered by their newly acquired literacy and
class consciousness, women workers in Chongqing engaged in frequent strikes, slowdowns, and
other forms of protest (Howard 2013).

In Shanghai, the textile mills that employed most women workers in the city continued to
operate in the early years of Japanese occupation. Wartime inflation fed a boom in production
of cloth and yarn and led to soaring profits for British, American, Japanese, and Chinese
companies. But many workers fled the occupied areas of the city to live in refugee camps in
the International Settlement. With America's entry into the war, the Japanese took over the
International Settlement and all textile mills within it. Textile production plummeted, and
the number of women workers dropped to below 4,000 from the prewar high of over 116,00o. Many
factories were repurposed to sew military uniforms. Many unemployed women returned to their
home villages during the war, but those who stayed in the city survived however they could,
through work such as smuggling in rice from the suburbs, collecting garbage, pulling carts,
and growing vegetables.

During the war, the YWCA in Shanghai linked up with the National Salvation Movement, using its
night schools to educate women about the Japanese invasion and promote resistance. They
organized patriotic schools in refugee camps. Many workers joined the Working Women's
Battlefront Service Unit, which sent teams of women in military uniforms out to work with army
units, helping with propaganda in local villages, nursing of wounded soldiers, and camp chores
(Honig 1986, 223-224). Under the Second United Front, the previously outlawed CCP was
legalized in Nationalist-controlled regions, so the Communists took up open mobilization of
urban workers again. Communist organizers encouraged women workers to subvert production in
Japanese factories by stealing cloth, yarn, and food, setting the machines to run slowly or
stopping them, deliberately wasting materials, and producing shoddy cloth (Honig 1986,
228–229). Although the effects of such sabotage on Japanese production are unclear, the Party
gained a significant foothold among women workers through these efforts. Outside of industrial
centers, women in most of the country, including cities such as Beijing, still had few
opportunities for factory work and faced strong social disapproval for leaving home to work in
any kind of job in public. Forced by dire circumstances during the war to earn money for their
families, most women in such regions engaged in various combinations of petty trading,
brokering, domestic service, home handicraft production, black market trading, trafficking,
and prostitution. Through these activities women were crucial to the functioning of the
informal economy, through which large portions of the population survived (Ma 2015).

Wartime Culture

Women were prominent in the dynamic wartime popular culture. In the (mostly male-authored)
literature of resistance written during the war, women often appeared as prostitutes or rape
victims, embodying the violation of the Chinese nation, as traditional heroines whose chastity
and filial piety exemplified service to the nation, and sometimes as women warriors in the
traditional mode of Mulan. Women also contributed to wartime culture as writers. In the
context of Japanese censorship in Shanghai, women writers turned their focus to domestic
themes of family life, female identity, and survival. Many expressed a sense of urgency,
capturing their perceptions and experiences in writing as their world was falling apart around
them. Su Qing wrote: The world has gone crazy. Distress, agitation, depression, and a bizarre
joy characterize our mental state. Sometimes it is like dancing on top of a mountain and other
times it is like building a jade palace on thin ice. I know only too well that everything is
going to collapse soon, but I still hope to grasp this moment and seek serenity and
fulfillment right away! Otherwise what am I going to do with these few surviving moments? So I
have chosen writing and publishing to consume my time.. I want to survive my time. I want to
live, and I want to live in a way that most satisfies myself.

(Quoted in Huang 2005, 25)

Women such as Su articulated a new mode of femininity, focused on individual expression and
the preservation of self in a dangerous time when life itself was tenuous. Eileen Chang, the
most prominent of these writers, commented, "An individual can afford to wait, but an era is
transient. Things are being torn apart, and an even larger destruction is on its way.. Make
yourself famous as early as possible! If success comes too late, it will not be as
enjoyable..Hurry! Hurry! Otherwise it will be too late! Too late!" (quoted in Huang 2005, 21).

Yet many women who contributed to the lively press culture in occupied Shanghai emphasized
that individual opportunity functioned for the good of the society. One woman, He Jiashui,
wrote to a Shanghai journal: The editor might want the contributors to describe their
miseries, but I have no miseries to come to terms with. I know I am expected to recount the
unequal treatment I have experienced, but I have been treated well anywhere I have been, much
better than I deserve. This is a turbulent time; the conflicts between evil and good forces
are certainly fiercer than in normal times. There are cannibalistic elements in human
relations, but there are also friendship,

CHINA

integrity, and generosity.. During a turbulent time, talents are in great demand, and few can
complain that they have no opportunities to make use of their talents.. Women often take great
advantage of this particular time. For some reason, men of our time feel sorry and are obliged
to respect women's rights. In any case, conscientious people can always find a way to be
constructive for [the good of] society. (Quoted in Huang 2005, 48-49)

War created misery for many and opportunity for some, but for most, life was utterly
transformed.

Women in Yenan

In the fall of 1935, survivors of the CCP's Long March (see Chapter 5) set up a guerilla base
in a poor, remote, mountainous region in northern Shaanxi province, centered on the town of
Yenan. This was the headquarters for the CCP during the war, from 1936 to 1945. Throughout the
war, in Yenan and other base areas under the control of its Red Army, the CCP built new
military and state structures to mobilize the population to join the fight against the
Japanese. The Party perfected the political mode of the "mass line," a strategy of going down
to the villages to listen directly to the concerns of the peasant masses and then
incorporating them into policy. The CCP's populist regime gave many the hope of democratic
change, but the Party's main goal was to build a new state, based on broad peasant support,
that marginalized the old landlord elites as class enemies of the masses of poor peasants.
Gender norms in the region were, ironically, particularly conservative. In this context, Party
cadres deemphasized promotion of women's rights, as they had in the Jiangxi Soviet, out of
concern for alienating the male population. In 1936 the CCP called for development of mass
organizations (including women's associations) in the northwest border regions, but at the
same time it warned of potential divisiveness if women's rights and marriage reforms were
pushed too far. Women's associations grew very slowly during the war years, and they placed
the greatest emphasis on harnessing women's labor to help the war effort by increasing women's
role in agricultural production and in the revival of household textile production (which had
diminished due to competition from industrially produced textiles). In 1938 these associations
were consolidated into the Rear Area Enemy Resistance Association, which set up training
centers for women cadres to teach local women Party policy and to recruit them as activists in
their communities. They organized women into cooperatives to make shoes, blankets, socks, and
uniforms for the Red Army. Women were also encouraged to work in the fields, both to make up
for the absence of men and to promote local economic self-sufficiency. Women leaders noted at
the time that these enhanced economic roles increased women's status and autonomy within the
family. The Party also encouraged women to participate in political activities as voters and
candidates in local elections. In the 1941 election, 8 percent of township council seats were
held by women-far less than the 25 percent in the Jiangxi Soviet (see Chapter 5). There were
about seven thousand women Party members in Yenan in 1937, about 15 percent of total Party
membership, though most were students and cadres who had come from other regions (Johnson
1983).

As the military and economic crisis deepened in 1941–1942, the Party came to focus exclusively
on women's roles in the "production war." It warned cadres to focus on family harmony and
wifely loyalty until the dire circumstances of poor men were alleviated. It directed that
women's political participation and other rights should remain only slogans and, after 1943,
that women should not be summoned for political meetings that would detract from their
production. For cadres in Yenan, the Party itself replaced family authority in key ways,
arranging marriages and assigning work. With everyone mobilized for the war effort, a new
militarized social life took shape in which women and men wore military uniforms, took
military training, and participated in military missions and underground Party work behind
Japanese lines. Everyone was subjected to strict Party discipline.

In 1942, as the Nationalist blockade was reaching a critical point, Mao launched a campaign to
silence his critics in the Party, unify cadres in support of his ideological line, and
indoctrinate the tens of thousands of new recruits, mostly young students and intellectuals,
who were fleeing KMT-controlled areas to join the CCP in Yenan. This was called the
"rectification campaign." Party members who had criticized Mao or his policies in Yenan were
singled out for public criticism in "struggle sessions" and banished to remote villages to be
reeducated by doing manual labor and living with peasants. Thousands of people deemed to be
unrepentant were executed.

A defining moment of this campaign was the criticism of the writer Ding Ling (see Chapter 6),
which clarified the Party's stance toward women and intellectuals. After the Nationalists
executed her common-law husband (she shunned the notion of civil marriage as legalized
prostitution), she joined the Communist Party, sent her infant son to live with her mother in
Hunan, and took up work editing a journal for the Party-sponsored League of Left Wing Writers.
In 1933 the Nationalist secret police kidnapped her and held her under house arrest for three
years. In 1937 she escaped to Yenan, where she took up cultural propaganda work and helped
organize women's war work.

On International Women's Day in 1942 she published an essay, "Thoughts on March 8, in which
she criticized gender discrimination among Communist cadres and contradictions in their
attitudes about women.

BOX 8.4

Ding Ling's "Thoughts on March 8"

Ding Ling's essay described the paradox of gender politics in Yenan: the Party declared women
to be equal to men and expected them to participate fully in the work of revolution, yet their
happiness and effectiveness as cadres was hampered by the persistence of sexist assumptions
about marriage among male cadres and by women's own emotionality and unrealistic romanticism.
She wrote, "When will it no longer be necessary to attach special weight to the word 'woman'
and to raise it specially?.. Women in [Yenan] are happier than women elsewhere in China..It
doesn't seem to surprise anyone that women make up a big proportion of the staff in the
hospitals, sanatoria, and clinics, but they are inevitably the subject of conversation, as a
fascinating problem, on every conceivable occasion. Moreover, all kinds of women comrades are
often the target of deserved criticism." As in her early fiction, Ding Ling posited an
essentialist view of women and her natural ability as a woman to see and criticize their
weaknesses: "I myself am a woman, so I understand the failings of women better than others.
But I also have a deeper understanding of what they suffer."

The heart of the essay described the contradictions of sexual politics in Yenan that made it
impossible for women to avoid accusations of selfishness and political backwardness. As they
tried to balance Party work with marriage and motherhood, women comrades faced gossip and
ridicule. They were criticized for their marriage choices, but slandered for remaining single.
"I am the first to admit it is a shame when a man's wife is not progressive and retards his
progress. But let us consider to what degree [these women] are backward. Before marrying, they
were inspired by the desire to soar in the heavenly heights and lead a life ofbitter struggle.
They got married partly because of physiological necessity and partly as a response to sweet
talk about 'mutual help. Thereupon they are forced to toil away and become 'Noras returned
home." When

(continued)
they had children, they were "publicly derided" for giving up their autonomy and productive
work for domestic life, yet if women comrades employed nannies, then "behind their backs there
would also be the most incredible gossip and whispering campaigns." She stated that divorce
was almost always initiated by the husband and the pretext was "invariably the wife's
political backwardness." Yet women who took their children to nurseries or tried to have
abortions were asked, "Why did you get married in the first place?" She concluded, "Under
these conditions it is impossible for women to escape this destiny of backwardness. When women
capable of working sacrifice their careers for the joys of motherhood, people always sing
their praises. But after ten years or so, they have no way of escaping the tragedy of
'backwardness' [i.e., divorce]"

She concluded the essay with advice for her fellow women comrades to take care of their health
and emotional well-being: "Use your brain and make a habit of doing so.. It is the best way of
avoiding the pitfalls of sweet words and honeyed phrases, of being sidetracked by petty gains,
of wasting our emotions and wasting our lives.. Aware, modern women should identify and cast
off all their rosy illusions. Happiness is to take up the struggle in the midst of the raging
storm and not to pluck the lute in the moonlight or recite poetry among the blossoms... Not to
suffer is to become degenerate. The strength to carry on should be nurtured through the
quality of perseverance. People without great aims and ambitions rarely have the firmness of
purpose that does not covet petty advantages or see a comfortable existence. But only those
who have aims and ambitions for the benefit, not of the individual, but of humankind as a
whole can persevere to the end" (Ding 1990, 317-319). During the rectification campaign, Ding
Ling was forced to apologize for her statements, though she did not retract them, and was
banned from Party work for two years. The head of the Women's Department castigated her and
like-minded women cadres for their "outdated" views, which did not recognize that equality of
the sexes had been fully established in Yenan and which instead advocated a one-sided feminism
that undermined Party unity (Johnson 1983). Ironically, in her attempt to reconcile feminist
goals with the imperatives of nationalism and revolution, Ding Ling had already given up
bourgeois notions of individualism. The war's devastating impact on social and economic order
and ordinary family life justified the new Yenan mode of citizenship for women and men, which
was centered on sacrifice to the Party and mobilization to work, first for the war effort and
ultimately for the Communist revolution. In the new society created by revolution, women were
to be liberated by the Party to participate fully in economic and political transformation,
but not to realize feminist goals of self-fulfillment or individual autonomy.
