JAPAN The victory in 1600 by forces loyal to Tokugawa Ieyasu, the most powerful military overlord in Japan, brought an end to the Warring States period. To gain peacetime political legitimacy, Tokugawa had Japan's emperor-an official with no political power and only traces of prestige lingering from the ancient past-name him as the new shogun. Tokugawa and his suc- cessors as shoguns created a political structure that ruled over Japan until the middle of the nineteenth century. Historians of Japan refer to the two and a half centuries of Tokugawa rule as Japan's early modern era. Neo- Confucian doctrine was one of several tools used by the Tokugawa shoguns to consolidate their rule over Japan, and by the end of the seventeenth cen- tury, Neo-Confucianism had gained a foothold in early modern Japan, just as it had in Choson Korea and, centuries earlier, in China. To control Japan, Tokugawa Ieyasu set up a system of self-regulating status groups, with the shogun as the supreme ruler over these groups. The groups were, nominally, the four classes of the ancient Confucian texts, recast for Japanese use as samurai, farmers, artisans, and merchants. Self-regulating status groups contained more diversity than homogeneity; there were rich farmers and poor farmers, rich merchants and poor merchants, samurai who were powerful provincial rulers (called daimyo) and lowly foot soldiers, and men and women. Not all groups within society were equally Confucianized, and the impact of Confucian principles on gender relations, marriage, and sexuality varied among the status groups. These differences will be discussed in detail in this section. As status groups, their boundaries were less flexible than those of the social classes in China, where a young man's diligent study of Confucian classics could potentially earn him a spot in the ruling class.
72 2/ GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA
In Tokugawa-period Japan, mobility among the bottom three status groups
was not uncommon, since sons and daughters of farm families migrated as
teenagers to find work either on nearby farms or in cities, towns, and castles,
but it was nearly impossible, until the end of the Tokugawa period, for nonsamurai to enter the samurai ruling class.
At the top of the ruling order, right under the shogun, were the daimyo.
These were powerful and wealthy male military overlords who, like the shogun, controlled from several hundred to many thousands of samurai warriors as well as many farming villages whose revenues they taxed. Although
the daimyo were part of the samurai status group, they were treated as a
special category of warriors. The Tokugawa shoguns were most concerned
with the daimyo because they were provincial leaders from whose ranks the
shoguns themselves had emerged. In their consolidation of power in the
early seventeenth century, the Tokugawa shoguns punished those daimyo
who had fought against them in 1600 by either taking away some or all of
their land or moving them to less desirable areas. More trusted daimyo were
moved to territories closer to the Tokugawa capital at Edo, and less trusted
daimyo were moved to the periphery of the islands. After these changes, the
remaining daimyo were permitted to rule fairly autonomously within their
own domains, collecting taxes and adjudicating legal disputes, as long as
their laws and procedures were generally consistent with Tokugawa practice
and they did not challenge the Tokugawa shoguns' authority.
The Tokugawa shoguns also kept an eye on the daimyo by controlling
their marriages and family lives. After 1615, to prevent alliances of potential
rivals to the shogun, members of daimyo families were required to secure
the shogun's permission to marry. In addition, after the 1630s, the shogun
implemented an "alternate attendance system" that required daimyo to
travel back and forth annually between the shogun's capital at Edo (today's
Tokyo) and the daimyo's own castles in their domain, taking with them a
huge retinue of their samurai. Maintaining a castle at home and a mansion
in Edo and feeding and lodging hundreds of samurai as they moved about
the country cost the daimyo a large part of the taxes they raised from the
farmers, guaranteeing that the daimyo would never have enough resources
to successfully challenge the Tokugawa. While alternate attendance drained
daimyo resources, however, it also brought many daimyo into the shoguus
government as officials while they were in Edo.
In addition to depleting the daimyo's financial resources, the alternate attendance system also controlled the daimyo by making use of their bonds
with their wives and children. Daimyo wives and children were required to
Japan 73
remain in Edo, where they were, for the most part, hostages in the gilded
cages of their mansions. Post stations were set up at frequent intervals along
the roads leading to Edo--roads carried a constant stream of commercial
traffic in addition to massive processions of daimyo performing their alternate attendance-to check for the movement of weapons into and women
out of Edo. Nuns, entertainers, housewives on pilgrimages or personal travel,
and other commoner women could move freely, but daimyo wives' movements were suspect and therefore strictly controlled.
The wives and daughters of daimyo and other high-ranking samurai families were not totally without employment possibilities while in Edo, however.
Some were able to gain appointments to the women's quarters of the shogun's
court, where they could act as palace functionaries, adding to their families
prestige by carrying messages, making alliances with women of other daimyo
families, and serving the shogun and his wife in a variety of capacities, including entertainment, advice giving, and sexual service. Sexual service carried
the possibility of becoming the mother of a shogunal heir, a powerful position
at the shogun's court (Totman 1967, 89-110). The sons of daimyo families
were also influenced by the control mechanisms of the alternate attendance
system. Raised in Edo, the center of national culture by 1700, these sons
helped to link the Japanese islands together culturally when they moved back
to their families' domains as adult daimyo. The rough, rustic young daimyo
sons of the Warring States period were soon tamed by Edo's urban culture,
creating a new type of elite masculinity for the daimyo class.
The end of a century of warfare throughout the Japanese islands and a
decade of incursions into Chosön also changed the meaning of life for countless samurai warriors of less than daimyo status after 1600. Over the course of
a few decades, the daily practice of being samurai required them to become
government bureaucrats, serving their daimyo or shogunal superiors in
offices rather than as dashing warriors. At the same time, all samurai men
were required to wear two swords, and nonchalant bad-boy behavior continued to be viewed as charming in samurai circles throughout the'Tokugawa
period. One seventeenth-century scholar even created a term for this type of
cult of masculinity in his popular book on the "way of the warrior" (bushidō).
The rowdier samurai initially resisted government authorities' attempts to
remold them as scholars, gentlemen, and bureaucrats. This was especially
true of masterless samurai, whose daimyo had been killed or dispossessed of
all their land; many of these rootless young men roamed the streets making
trouble, often as armed youth gangs. It took till 1650 for masterless samurai to be either defeated or co-opted into a life of responsible manly work,
74 2/GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA
similar to the life of samurai who were under the control of successful daimyo.
This created a new definition of masculinity in which literacy, education, and
culture were as important as martial skills.
The Tokugawa State and the Regulating ofEveryday Life
Before the rise of the Tokugawa shoguns, the liveliest intellectual tradition in
Japan had been found in Buddhist theology. But the new period seemed to call
for a new focus, one more practical than the introspective, faith-based learning
of Buddhism. Chinese Neo-Confucian thought entranceda new generation of
scholars. The Tokugawa shoguns saw one of the schools of Neo-Confucianism
as particularly supportive of their claim to political power in Japan. In this
Japanese approach to Neo-Confucianism, the Japanese shogun was equated
with the emperor of China's Confucian ideology, while the Japanese emperor,
who was in reality a figurehead with no political power, was equated with the
Confucian concept of "heaven." The militarily powerful shogun's respect for
the impotent Japanese emperor was used to justify the shogun's right to rule.
This school of Neo-Confucianism also rationalized the four-status structure
that placed the samurai on top and contended that the Confucian relationships, one of which was the husband's superiority to his wife, were natural and
proper for all people and times. Small wonder that the shogun's government
encouraged the samurai to study the same Confucian texts their counterparts
in the Chinese bureaucracy studied in order to qualify for jobs as officials in
Japan's early modern state. Only the samurai, who were expected to be part of
the ruling class, were eligible to be educated at the government's expense. All
women and commoners of both genders, and many samurai who sought specialized education, paid for their own education. Confucian ideas were often
part of their education, but learning took a variety of forms for commoners
and many samurai as well.
The basic educational texts for samurai were written in a form of Chinese
that educated young men in Japan were expected to learn in the early modern era, even while a bourgeoning publishing industry cranked out popular
literature for the masses in Japanese kana script. New and diverse types of
schools, works of prose and poetry, theatrical works and the arts, and essays
on philosophy and government created new ideals of masculinity and femininity. Many of these institutions and works of art were aimed at the samurai,
but most found eager cross-status consumers.
The Tokugawa self-regulation system was extended to all status groups.
Each village regulated itself, and cities and towns had a variety of means
of governance. As long as the towns and villages paid their taxes, mainJapan 75 tained the peace, and behaved in ways that roughly paralleled Tokugawa laws, farmers, artisans, and merchants generally governed themselves. The shogun's government involved itself as little as possible in the day-to-day oversight of most commoners. But the shogunal government stepped into everyday life when it came to relations with foreigners. By the late 1630s, fear of Christianity and Christian missionaries led the Tokugawa to allow foreign trade only with Chinese, Koreans, Ryükyű Islanders, and the Dutch (who promised not to send missionaries) and to restrict trade to limited places. To strengthen the ban on Christianity, all Japanese were required to register their families as members of a local Buddhist temple. As a result, there are extensive temple records of births, marriages, and deaths. Together with records kept by families themselves,these temple records give us a good overview of family formation and gender relations in the early modern period (Walthall 1991). The government also involved itself in the construction of gender through social and economic policies as well as ideologies that affected people of different statuses in different ways. Even before the beginning of the Tokugawa period, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, a powerful daimyo who con- trolled most of Japan, decreed that armed farmer-warriors had to choose be- tween giving up their arms to become full-time farmers and giving up their farmland to become full-time warriors. A man who chose to be a samurai had to live in or near his daimyo's castle. For his service to his daimyo (the service became increasingly bureaucratic in a time of peace) and to compen- sate for the loss of his land, he and his successors were paid a stipend. This policy was continued under the Tokugawa. Soon the forced movement of sa- murai led to the development of towns and cities called "castle towns." Mer- chants and artisans migrated to the castle towns to serve the now landless samurai, building homes and furnishings for themselves and the samurai, making clothing and armor, marketing food, running lodges and restau- rants, carrying out banking, publishing books, creating arts and entertain- ment, and running a lively business in the sex trades. Men of the samurai status were not supposed to be involved in merchant or artisan activities, although some occupations, such as medicine and scholarship, were open to all statuses (only a small handful ofpractitioners in these fields were women; some women were midwives, teachers, poets, and painters). By 1700, in most daimyo domains, about 6 to 7 percent of the population were urbanized samurai, an equal percentage were merchants and artisans, and about 85 percent were farmers. Japan's cities had grown enormously by 1700. Edo, the Tokugawa's own castle town, was the world's largest city,
76 2/GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA
having grown from a tiny fishing village in 1590 to over a million residents.
The population of Japan as a whole grew from twelve million in 160o to
thirty million in 1720, and then it stagnated for the next 140 years.
Samurai men were at the heart of the governmental service system. They
received stipends for the service, and at times supplementary income if
they were particularly talented. If a samurai died without an heir, his stipend
was terminated. His wife and daughters were not allowed to inherit his stipend, and they were often left penniless. As a result, many samurai wives
had to tolerate their husbands' concubines (secondary wives) to make sure
there would be an heir to support them. Children born to concubines were
acknowledged as legitimate, and a concubine's son inherited his father's stipends and property if he was the only son. The primary wife was the legal
mother of a concubine's children, which placed the concubine in the lowest
position in the household-below her own birth children. (Note that the
legal status of secondary wives and of the children born to them differed
significantly in Qing, Choson, and Tokugawa Japan at this time.)
Adoption of children and adults as heirs was quite common as well. In the
samurai class, marriages were arranged and their primary official purpose
was producing an heir, but most families nevertheless had loving relationships. That is not to say that samurai men did not have emotional extramarital relationships in addition to those with their wives and concubines. They
did, without a sense of impropriety or shame. Samurai women's extramarital affairs were strictly illegal, however, and popular novels and plays of the
mid-Tokugawa period depict such affairs as ending in execution or suicide
for the star-crossed lovers.
The everyday lives of the other two status groups in the cities-merchants
and artisans-were intertwined with the samurai who patronized their shops,
passed them daily on the streets, celebrated the same religious festivals,
and sat next to them in the theaters. In some other ways, their lives did not
mingle. Intermarriage of samurai and commoners was highly unusual before
the nineteenth century, and commoner boys' and girls' training for adulthoop
was different from that of the samurai. Commoner children of both sexes expected to play a role in commercial or artisanal houses as adults, and both
needed to be literate. Marriage partners were chosen for their compatibility,
and the young people themselves often played a role in choosing their mates,
unlike the common practice of arranged marriages among the samurai.
Education for non-samurai urban children was varied and focused
on practicality. Many children were educated at schools run by priests at
local Buddhist temples or at small private schools run by both married
Japan 77
and unmarried women. Many teenage boys served apprenticeships with
merchant houses outside their own family, and in some cases the most talented apprentice married the boss's daughter, usually with the daughter's
approval. That young man would become a part of his boss's familya practice that echoed the earlier matrilocal marriage patterns of the elite,
described in Chapter 1-and the young couple would later inherit and run
the business together. Other urban boys might attend one of many private
academies run by famous intellectuals for any student who could pay the
tuition, regardless of their status as samurai or commoner. Some academies
focused on science and mathematics; others stressed Confucian virtue. The
most famous of these was the Kaitokudō Academy, founded in 1726, which
expanded the principles of orthodox Confucianism to teach that the governing responsibilities of samurai and the economic activities of merchants
were equally important in the community and larger society. Many boys
took the Kaitokudo's courses in reading, accounting and abacus use, and
simple Confucianism (loyalty and filial piety). Those who advanced to further study analyzed Confucian texts (Smith 1988; Najita 1977).
Boys and girls over the age of seven or eight rarely studied together, as
the skills they needed for adulthood were different. Urban daughters usually
received less formal education than their brothers, although an unlettered
young woman could not make a good marriage. Many girls were taught to
read and write and especially to use the abacus and do the simple math
needed to keep the family and business accounts. Urban women were expected to work in the family business; even in the richest families, brides,
who did not have to perform difficult house maintenance chores, were called
upon to serve their parents-in-law. Girls' earliest education, like that of
their brothers, was often in temple schools or small schools run by women
teachers. Girls studied texts called jokun (precepts for women) that stressed
filial piety and obedience to one's husband and in-laws. Some well-to-do
merchant families paid upper-class samurai families to take their daughters
in as servants to train them in etiquette and manners (a chaperone was often
sent to make sure the daughter would be well cared for). A daughter's education could cost up to 5 percent of her family's total income. By the end of
the Tokugawa period, approximately 50 percent of men and 15 percent
of women throughout Japan were literate; the majority of literate women
lived in the cities. While these literacy rates seem very low to us today, they
were among the world's highest in the nineteenth century.
The texts men and women studied included references to the Confucian
idea of women's inferiority. Many of the jokun used in temple schools, the
2 / GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA
most famous of which was Onna daigaku (Greater Learning for Women), described the ideal woman as loyal to her husband and parents-in-law, passive, submissive, cheerful, and hardworking in her role as a wife. Onna daigakulong believed to have been written by Confucian scholar Kaibara Ekiken
(1630-1714)-was read by millions of girls from the early eighteenth century
until the early twentieth century. It was considered by Japanese feminists in
the late nineteenth century to be one of the reasons for women's subordination. Yet when first published in 1716, it was just one part of a larger work, A
Treasure Chest of Greater Learning for Women (Onna daigaku takara bako),
that discussed numerous occupations for women, training of children, practical skills, ways to deal with medical emergencies, and literature and poetry,
in addition to its notorious list of women's shortcomings. Many scholars now
stress that the message of subordination in jokun such as Onna daigaku paled
by comparison with the empowering role of literacy promoted by their use as
textbooks (Tоcco 2005).
It cannot be ignored, however, that these works were part of girls' education, that fewer girls than boys received education, and that women's legal
status was far below men's. Yet that does not mean that women were not
prized for what they did do. While women of samurai status were viewed as
servants of their parents-in-law and childbearers for their husbands, merchant women's status relative to their husbands was often higher. They had
business roles to play in their families, and many merchant-status parents
allowed their daughters to express their opinions in the selection of their
husbands because family harmony was essential to the success of their firms.
Sexuality and the Arts
Early modern urban life, inwhich samurai, merchants, and artisans participated, cannot be understood outside the context of sexuality. The Tokugawa
government sought to control the boundaries of sexuality; uncontrolled sexuality was of great concern to them. Their reaction to the rise of kabuki
theater is a good example of the government's anxiety over uncontrolled
sexuality. In 1603, a woman dancer named Okuni introduced to Kyoto residents a new form of sensual dance performance-this was an early form of
kabuki. At first all the performers were women, and female kabuki troupes
became very popular in Kyoto, Edo, and Osaka. But onlookers often became
excited by the dancers, which could lead to fights, so the authorities forced
the performances to the outskirts of cities in 1608. Soon a lively sex trade
involving actors and would-be performers followed the kabuki troupes,
leading the government to outlaw all female stage performers in 1629. Boy
Japan 79
actors then took over the women's roles, but the government found that this
did not solve the problem of audiences' overly enthusiastic reactions to the
actors. Many of the boys were as attractive to the male theater-goers as
the women had been. Believing the audience members' adulation of this
new type of actor was as problematic as the previous type, the government
went one step farther and in 1653 restricted the performance of female roles
to adult males rather than boys. Theaters were moved to officially designated sexuality districts that had been set up in 1617 in Edo (the Yoshiwara
district), in 1629 in Osaka (Shinmachi), and in 1641 in Kyoto (Shimabara).
In these districts the sex industry was cordoned off from the rest of the city.
Brothels, mostly staffed by women and girls (though some also offered
boys as sex workers), were required to move to those districts. The sexuality zones attracted all sorts of arts and culture: in addition to brothels, there
were teahouses, artists' and writers' studios, theaters, and restaurants. Street
performances--including exotic animals, jugglers, musicians, and entertainers of all sorts-enlivened the zones. These zones, called "pleasure districts"
(yükaku), had been created too marginalize and control sexuality so the samu
rai could focus on carrying out their duties to their daimyo or the shogun.
In practice, these zones attracted samurai and commoner alike. They aimed
primarily at male pleasure, but many of the zones' residents were womensex workers, servants, teahouse attendants, and the like. Wives and daughters
of families not in the entertainment business, who did not live in the zones,
also entered to attend plays and other attractions.
Adult male actors had to shave their heads in the style of adult male
samurai.At first they wore small scarves to cover their bald patches and later
were allowed to wear wigs to perform female roles. But they continued to be
objects of audience members' desire. Indeed, many theater-goers, performers, and critics at the time believed that male actors performed femininity
better than women could. The government did not mind same-sex attraction
or male-male sexual relations as long as they followed proper rules of sexual
etiquette. The performance of sex was part of the accepted process of adult
male mentoring of samurai boys in the seventeenth century, practiced by
the Tokugawa family itself, the daimyo, and all ranks of warriors. Merchant
and artisan townsmen took part in sexual relations with young protégés as
well. Many urban adult men had marital relationships with their wives and
more casual sexual relationships with both male and female prostitutes. In
the Tokugawa era, sexual practice did not define sexual identity-that is,
as heterosexual or homosexual-as it would in the late nineteenth century
(Pflugfelder 1999).
80 2/ GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA
BOX 2.3
Japan
Ihara Saikaku, "The Umbrella Oracle"
In 1685, comedic writer Ihara Saikaku (for more on his life and work, see
Chapter 3) mocked the provincial ignorance of gullible villagers far from his
cosmopolitan birthplace, Osaka. In this sketch, we see the view of sophisticated urban people toward rural sexual attitudes.
To the famous "Hanging Temple of Kwannon"... someone had once
presented twenty oil-paper umbrellas which... were hung beside the
temple for the use of any and all who might be caught in the rain or
snow.... One day in the spring of 1649, however, a certain villager
borrowed one of the umbrellas and, while he was returning home...
the umbrella was blown completely out ofsight, andthough the villager
bemoaned its loss, there was not a thing he could do.
Borne aloft by the wind, the umbrella landed finally in the little
hamlet of Anazato,far in the mountains of the island of Kyushu. The
people of this village had from ancient times been completely cut off
from the world and--uncultured folk that they were-had never even
seen an umbrella! All the learned men and elders of the village gathered around to discuss the curious object.... Finally one local wise
man stepped forward and proclaimed..., "Though I hesitate to utter
that August Name, this is without a doubt the God of the Sun!"
All present were filled with awe.we....
 The
 whole population
 of
the village went up into the mountains and... built a shrine that the
deity's spirit might be transferred hencefrom Ise. When they had paid
reverence to it, the divine spirit did indeed enter the umbrella.
At the time of the summer rains the site upon which the shrine
was situated became greatly agitated.... When the umbrella was
consulted, the following oracle was delivered: "All this summer the
sacred hearth has been simply filthy, with cockroaches boiled in
the holy vessels. ... Let there not be a single cockroach left alive! I
also have one other request. I desire you to select a beautiful young maiden as a consolation offering for me. If this is not done within
seven days... I will rain you all to death, so that the seed of man
remains no more upon the earth!"
Thus spake the oracle.
The villagers were frightened out oftheir wits.... The young maidens, weeping and wailing, strongly protested the umbrella-god's cruel
demand.... They cried, "How could we survive even one night with
such a god?" for they had come to attach a peculiar significance to the
odd shape that the deity had assumed.
At this juncture a young and beautiful widow [said], "Since it is
forthe god, I will offer myself in place ofthe young maidens." All night long the beautiful widow waited in the shrine, but she did not get a bit of affection. Enraged, she charged into the inner sanctum, grasped the divine umbrella firmly in her hands and, screaming, "Worthless deceiver!" she tore it apart, and threw the pieces as far as she could! (Keene 1955, 354-356)
Sex with a serving maid within the home or a boy who was a protégé
could be practiced privately anywhere, but the shogun's government confined sex for purchase to the segregated pleasure districts. Young women far
outnumbered young men in legally licensed brothels. To be sure, life for sex
workers was not pleasant. Pleasure districts were surrounded by moats and
gates, preventing the sex workers from leaving. Girls sold to brothels as very
young children led difficult lives, their often elegant clothing and genteel
manner merely a part of the performance of sexuality. Sex workers were
ranked by their artistic skills and training. The highest-ranked entertainers,
called geisha, were, like their Korean counterparts (kisaeng), literate, musically skilled, and witty courtesans. They consorted with men of means, often
high-ranking officials and merchants. But like their low-ranking, less skilled
sisters in the sex trades, even geisha were indentured to their houses and required to pay off their contracts if they wished to change their profession.
Sex workers outside the government-licensed brothels had a much tougher time. The government did not permit unregulated sex work, whether by males
or females, so people who engaged in unlicensed sex for hire were arrested if
caught. Sadder yet, burial records indicate that the leading cause of death for prostitutes was syphilis. The average age of death for serving girls at roadside post stations, who often engaged in unregulated sex, was twenty-one; those in the licensed sex market suffered similar fates.
And yet, in these crowded areas of sexuality, gender oppression, and
artistic license, urban culture flourished. Because so many people found
themselves at the mercy of the uncertainties of life and fortune, the world
81
82 2/ GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA Japan
of the arts and sexuality in the late seventeenth century came to be called
the "floating world" (ukiyo), a concept of life's impermanence familiar to all
Japanese from the teachings of Buddhism. Life expectancy, especially for
entertainers, was short, and for many people in urban areas, gender, far from
being "real" or "natural," was constituted through performance onstage and
in the brothels.
Gender and Farm Families
Gender relations among the overwhelming majority of Japanese who were
farmers differed from those of the urbanized samurai and commoners and
were far less influenced by Confucian propriety. Farm women's roles depended on their families' wealth and on local customs that varied throughout Japan. As in China and Korea, Japanese farm wives, husbands, children,
and other members of the family contributed to the family's well-being (productive work) and continuity (reproductive work). Mothers bore children
(reproductive work) but also had the primary responsibility for planting
and threshing rice, spinning thread, and sewing clothing (productive work).
Japanese fathers took charge of early childhood education and even infant
care (reproductive work), and also went out to their fields daily to maintain
their farms and, at harvest season, to gather in the grain and other crops
(productive work). Children of six or seven years carried their siblings on
their backs while playing or attending school, while their parents and their
grandparents (if they were still vigorous) worked in the fields. No member of
the average farm family could avoid either reproductive or productive work.
Some tasks were more likely to be performed by one sex or the other, but if a
woman was not available for planting or a man for harvesting, no one sacrificed family welfare and continuity on the altar of sex differences (Uno 1991).
Representation in village communal associations-the heart oflocal governance for the self-regulating farming status-was a different story. Farm
women usually took part as representatives oftheir families only when a suitable male relative was not available, although from time to time a senior member of a family favored a daughter over any of the sons and sent her to village
association meetings. Village endogamy (marriage within the village) was the
most common practice in early modern Japan, but when young people did
migrate to a neighboring village for marriage, it was usually women who
did that. Villages generally did not allow "outsiders"to attend meetings of the
village's shrine association, an important sign of inclusion. Women were more
likely to be excluded from village leadership because they were "outsiders,"
and also because of the villagers' preferences for male leadership.
In the medieval and early modern periods, farm women planted rice
seedlings in straight rows while men prepared the rice paddy.
"THE FARMER PLANTING THE RICE SPROUTS." THE MIRIAM AND
IRA D. WALLACH DIVISION OF ART, THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY
/NYPL CATALOG ID: B11818701
Rural boys and girls were less likely to attend school than their urban
counterparts, but a significant number did gain rudimentary reading skills.
Some learned to read at home, while others attended the same kinds of
temple schools or small schools run by women that were found in the cities
and towns. Many more village boys than girls attended these schools. Most
girls also learned household skills from their mothers or the families into
which some of them were apprenticed. Starting in early adolescence, girls
spent time in village "girls' rooms," where more senior girls and young
women guided younger girls in practical skills such as sewing and good manners. Girls enjoyed learning skills alongside their female friends and having
a chance to socialize at festival time, away from their parents' eyes, with the
"boys' rooms" in the village. In some areas of Japan, this socializing among
teenagers led to romance and marriage. Young people in villages were much
freer to choose their own marriage partners. Families esteemed harmony,
so a couple's compatibility and the wife's ability to get along with her marital family and contribute to its productivity were critical components of a
marriage. Divorce was common among farm families when these conditions
were not met, and remarriage was not stigmatized. Temple and family documents offer good records of family formation, dissolution, and reformation.
8
84 2/ GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN EARLY MODERN EAST ASIA
Despite the legal dominance of males as family heads and representatives in village governance, farmers were pragmatic. Samurai families could
be dissolved in the absence of a male heir, but farm families could collapse
without good men, women, boys, and girls to carry out their functions.
Both sexes and all age groups were viewed as necessary. Unlike in samurai
families, female infants were welcomed with birth celebrations and feted on
particular birthdays, as were their brothers. While infanticide was practiced
(illegally) by farm families, girl babies were no more likely than boys to be
targeted, as families sought gender balance as well as optimal family size.
Widows were not seen as superfluous. Many older women, both widows and
those still married, were relieved, after a few decades of backbreaking farm
work, to turn over the administration of their households to their daughtersin-law and begin to travel on pilgrimages with other similarly situated
women. They could now relax with a cup of tea; the government periodically
issued bans on tea drinking by women under forty to make sure they did
not sit around unproductively. Because this prohibition was issued so frequently, it is clear that it could not be strictly enforced, but it is an example
of the social requirement that young women work hard, leaving relaxation
as a reward for senior members ofthe family (Walthall 1991).