Global Context

The period from 1931 to 1945 started off with the Great Depression and ended with the deaths
of sixty million people worldwide in the Second World War. The Depression was unprecedented in
its global reach and in the depth of economic dislocation it produced. Economic disasters
helped to fuel extremist policies in a number of industrialized countries. Immediately
following the Depression, World War II produced far greater levels of suffering. Both the
Depression and the war led to major changes in gender relations as governments and civilians
responded aggressively to economic and military crises.

Beginning in 1929, all the industrialized countries in the world (except for the Soviet Union,
which had a state-managed economy and was cut off from trade relations with most of the rest
of the world at that time) were plunged into massive unemployment, with levels reaching 25
percent. For example, the German economy was still reeling from the hyperinflation of the
1920s, and it suffered a 33 percent unemployment rate in the early 1930s. In addition to
massive unemployment and widespread bank failures, the United States and Canada were struck by
the loss of hundreds of thousands of farms in the Great Plains, a result of the years of
drought known as the "Dust Bowl." Workers had no money to pay for commodities; this led to
plummeting prices, which in turn led to a crash in world trade. This had particularly harsh
effects on those countries that needed to sell luxury products on the world market to survive,
such as Japan and China (silk) or Germany and the United States (automobiles). International
trade fell by 66 percent from 1929 to 1934.

Trading nations adopted protectionist policies, but in the end, these hurt everyone except the
USSR, as each country was willing to impoverish the others to protect itself. This
protectionist tendency began to emerge in foreign policy as well, as governments saw less
reason to cooperate with each other through the League of Nations or other multilateral
bodies. In 1932 Japan was the first country to abandon the League when it objected to Japan's
annexation of Manchuria as a puppet state called Manzhouguo. The League was powerless to
oppose the invasion of Ethiopia by Italy's fascist government under Benito Mussolini, or the
assistance provided by Nazi Germany and fascist Italy to the fascist rebellion against the
government of Spain, which ended with the rebels' victory and the imposition of the
dictatorship of Francisco Franco (1892-1975).

Mussolini governed Italy from 1922 on, calling himself "Il Duce" (the leader). He nationalized
75 percent of the Italian economy in the early 1930s. In Germany, Adolf Hitler and his Nazi
Party came to power in 1933 and immediately began dismantling democracy and building up
military-industrial production, in violation of the 1919 Versailles Treaty. Hitler styled
himself as "Führer" (leader), following Mussolini's example. The Soviet Union began its first
Five-Year Plan at the same time, collectivizing agriculture throughout the country and
deporting or killing millions of kulaki (rich farmers). This led to the horrific famine of
1932-1933, in which eleven million people starved to death. To silence his critics, the Soviet
leader Joseph Stalin purged two million people, sending them to labor camps or executing them.

Meanwhile, as its war in China escalated, Japan had moved ideologically closer to Nazi Germany
and fascist Italy, and the three countries signed the Anti-Comintern Pact against Russia in
1936-1937. At that time, the three came to be known in the West as the Axis powers. Japan
battled the USSR in a series of skirmishes at Nomonhan, a small village on the border between
Manzhouguo and Mongolia, beginning in May 1939, but this did not stop the Germans from
secretly humiliating their Japanese ally by signing the Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact in
August 1939. The Nomonhan Incident ended in September with approximately ten thousand
casualties each on the Russian and Japanese sides; at around the same time the Germans invaded
Poland from the west and the Russians invaded it from the east. The German occupation of
Poland was brutal-their extermination camp at Auschwitz opened in 1940-and the Soviets
arrested and executed thousands of Poles as "counterrevolutionaries." The Nazis murdered
between two million and four million people, mostly Jews, at Auschwitz.

Bound to Poland by treaty, France, Britain, and the Commonwealth countries declared war on
Germany in September 1939. (Britain's colony in India did not actively join the fight against
the Axis powers; many Indians joined the Indian National Army, which sided with Japan against
Britain, although many more joined Gandhi's call to resist fascism while also carrying out
massive civil disobedience against Britain in the "Quit India" movement.) By May 1940, Germany
had conquered Norway, Denmark, Belgium, Holland, and France. Germany was bombing Britain in
advance of a planned invasion, Italy attacked British colonies in Africa, and Japan moved its
armies into French Indochina (Vietnam). The world was at war.

Of the major powers, only the United States and the Soviet Union were not yet involved in
World War II by the first months of 1940. (Latin American countries, which were not major
powers at that time, joined the war against the Axis between 1942, when Mexico and Brazil
declared war, and 1945, when Argentina did.) In 1940, Germany, Italy, and Japan signed one
more mutual security pact, the Tripartite Pact, which was directed against the United States.
Then Germany violated its Non-Aggression Pact with Russia by invading that country in June
1941. This occurred just as Japan was negotiating a Non-Aggression Pact of its own with the
USSR. (The Japanese-Soviet Pact held until August 8, 1945, the last week of World War II, but
Germany had again humiliated its ally.) The United States was not yet at war, although it had
begun to supply the Russians and British with armaments. As Japanese forces moved toward the
southern part of the French colony of Vietnam, the British colony of Malaya (which included
Singapore), and the Dutch colony of the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia),the United States placed
severe economic sanctions on Japan, especially an oil embargo. Negotiations to end the embargo
failed, and Japan bombed Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, which pulled the United States into
World War II.

Wartime always alters gender relations, and the prewar and wartime years were no exception.
Ideological changes came earlier in the Soviet Union, as the notion of gender equality was
embedded in Communist thought (Clements 2004). Changes in daily life followed in the 1920s,
with women being pushed into factories as the USSR ramped up industrialization. At the same
time, however, there was ambivalence about the role of women in the home. The "New Soviet
Woman" was told to be both excellent at work and dedicated to the home, which was to be a
place of refuge for her husband (who needed to rest from his labors) as well as a place of
nurturance for the children. The New Soviet Man would be made over from a rough country fellow
to a bold and hardworking man who might rise to become a Party leader.

In Latin America, the modern secular state elevated men and virility (Besse 2004). In Mexico,
for example, the post-1917 revolutionaries associated nationalism with virility, and they even
silenced women revolutionaries because they believed women were inherently conservative. At
the same time, the nationalist populism that the Mexican government espoused focused on social
and economic justice and helped to ease some of the patriarchal dominance within the family in
order to allow women to better serve the nation as wives and mothers. In Argentina, the
Peronist government forged close ties with male labor union leaders and emphasized "manly"
responsibility to protect the weak (women, workers, and others). In North America and Western
Europe, with the exception of France and Switzerland, most women earned the vote in the
interwar period (Sowerwine and Grimshaw 2004). In the 1930s, the fascist governments of Italy,
Spain, and Greece snatched the vote away from women after they had already earned it. German
women did not lose the vote with the rise of Hitler, but that did not make any difference, as
the vote became meaningless when all Germans lost their political voice. Mussolini announced
that a woman's function was to bear children, and to get women back in the household, he cut
women's wages to half those of men. Hitler's Germany closed birth control clinics, dissolved
feminist groups, labor unions, and socialist parties, and disallowed women from running for
public office. Women were to focus on the three K's-Kinder, Kirche, Küche (children, church,
kitchen).

Women in the democracies fared better, although gender continued to divide them from men.
France's conservative climate in the 1930s meant that, even with a socialist prime minister,
women still did not get the vote. On the other hand, France enacted provisions to support
mothers financially and repealed the part of the Napoleonic Code that required women to obey
their. husbands. France, Britain, Australia, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands, and pre-fascist
Italy and Germany all developed policies to support mothers financially after World War I. The
United States lagged behind, creating the Aid to Dependent Children program in 1935.

World War II and the subsequent mobilization of millions of men for military service drew
women into the workplace in unprecedented numbers. In the United States, for example, female
employment rose from 12 million in 1940 to 19 million in 1945; in Canada, the number of women
in the workforce rose from 600,000 in 1940 to 1.2 million in 1943. Australian and New Zealand
women were mobilized in "land armies" to grow food for Britain. In those European countries
invaded by Germany that had enjoyed greater democratic rights before conquest, many women
worked in order to survive, but not to support their conqueror.
